

REPORT
Annual
2024-2025
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
﻿
Annual
2024-2025
2
Shri Jitin Prasada
Hon’ble Minister of State for
Commerce & lndustry, and
Electronics & Information Technology,
Government of India
Shri Ashwini Vaishnaw
Hon’ble Minister of Railways,
lnformation & Broadcasting, and
Electronics & Information Technology, 
Government of India
Shri S. Krishnan
Secretary 
Ministry of Electronics &
Information Technology,
Government of India

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
3
Executive Summary	
9-12
1.	
Overview of MeitY: Vision, Mission, Objective,	
13-16 
Structure and Functions of MeitY
	
1.1	
Introduction
	
1.2	
Vision
	
1.3	
Mission
	
1.4	
Objectives
	
1.5	
Functions
	
1.6	
Work Allocation
	
1.7	
Organisation Structure
2.	
Digital India: Power to Empower	
17-63
	
2.1	
Introduction
	
	
2.1.1	
Extension of Digital India Programme
	
	
2.1.2	
Vision of Digital India
	
2.2	
Digital Infrastructure
	
	
2.2.1	
Digital Identity
	
	
2.2.2	
Enhancement of National Informatics Centre (NIC) National Cloud 
Services
	
	
2.2.3	
National Data Centre in North-East Region (NDC-NER)
	
	
2.2.4	
GI Cloud (MeghRaj)
	
	
2.2.5	
Bhaskaracharya National Institute for Space Applications and Geo-
informatics (BISAG-N)
	
	
2.2.6	
Public Internet Access Programme including Wi-Fi in Universities
C O N T E N T S

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
﻿
Annual
2024-2025
4
	
2.3	
Mobile based online Governance and Services on Demand
	
	
2.3.1	
India Portal
	
	
2.3.2	
User experience for Government (Websites & Apps) UI/UX 4G
	
	
2.3.3	
National Scholarships Portal (NSP)
	
	
2.3.4	
DigiLocker: Revolutionizing Paperless Governance
	
	
2.3.5	
Electronic Transaction Aggregation and Analysis Layer 3.0 (eTaal 3.0)
	
	
2.3.6	
Vikaspedia 2.0
	
	
2.3.7	
Implementation of National Data Highway (NDH)/ API Setu
	
	
2.3.8	
Pragati VC 2.0
	
	
2.3.9	
myScheme
	
	
2.3.10	 eGOVMMCASES 
	
	
2.3.11	 To set-up India Enterprise Architecture (IndEA) at NeGD
	
	
2.3.12	 OGD 2.0 (Open Government Data 2.0: Micro Service Based Architecture Leveraging Cloud 
Technology)
	
	
2.3.13	 e-Governance Standards and Guidelines
 
 
2.3.14 Unified Mobile Application for New-Age Governance 
	
	
2.3.15	 A Virtual Reality-Based Assistive System for Learning and Assessment of Persons with 
Intellectual Disabilities
	
	
2.3.16	 iMedDesk - AI Assisted Medical Services Framework by C-DAC Noida
	
	
2.3.17	 CollabFiles 
	
	
2.3.18	 GovDrive – Storage as a Service 
	
	
2.3.19	 Kisan Sarathi 2.0
 
 
2.3.20 Design and Development of School Management System, office ERP and Integrated Content 
Management Portal for Eklavya Model Residential Schools under the National Education 
Society for Tribal Students (NESTS)
	
	
2.3.21	 Gov.in Secure Intranet Portal
	
	
2.3.22	 Prayas 2.0
	
2.4	
Digital Empowerment
	
	
2.4.1	
Collaboration Application Development Platform by opening the Source Code of Government 
Applications (Open Forge)
	
	
2.4.2	
National Knowledge Network (NKN)
	
	
2.4.3	
Integrated Citizen Engagement Platform (INCEP)/MyGov
	
	
2.4.4	
Digital India Common Services Centre
	
	
2.4.5	
Digital India Bhashini
	
	
2.4.6	
Capacity Building Scheme

﻿
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
5
	
	
2.4.7	
E-Greeting Portal and Sampark 2.0
	
	
2.4.8	
Awareness and Communication plan for Digital India
	
	
2.4.9	
Modernisation/ digitalisation of Nagaland Fire & Emergency- Management system (NFES-MS)
	
	
2.4.10	 GOV.IN Appstore
	
2.5	
Digital India Initiatives by NIC
	
	
2.5.1	
Agriculture & Food Processing
	
	
2.5.2	
Health & Family Welfare
	
	
2.5.3	
Finance
	
	
2.5.4	
Education
	
	
2.5.5	
E-Transport
	
	
2.5.6	
Inclusive Development
	
	
2.5.7	
Consumer Affairs and Food & Public Distribution
	
	
2.5.8	
Law & Justice
	
	
2.5.9	
Home Affairs
	
	
2.5.10	 Culture and Tourism
	
	
2.5.11	 Labor & Employment
	
	
2.5.12	 Power and Energy
	
	
2.5.13	 Good Governance & Enforcement
3.	
Make in India: Electronics Manufacturing	
65-86
	
3.1	
National Policy on Electronics, 2019
	
3.2	
Growth of Electronics Sector
	
3.3	
Schemes and programs
	
3.4	
Investment Promotion to Attract Investment in ESDM Sector
	
3.5	
Measures to facilitate Ease of Doing Business
	
3.6	
Other programs
	
3.7	
Centre of Excellence in Electronics and ICT Application
	
	
3.7.1	
National Centre of Excellence for Large Area Flexible Electronics (NCFlexE)
	
	
3.7.2	
National Centre of Excellence in Technology for Internal Security (NCETIS)
	
	
3.7.3	
Next Generation AMOLED Displays, OLED Lighting and OPV Products
	
	
3.7.4	
Centre of Excellence in Medical Electronics and Bio-Physics
	
	
3.7.5	
Establishment of Gallium Nitride (GaN) Ecosystem Enabling Centre and Incubator (GEECI) at 
Society for Innovation and Development (SID), IISc Bengaluru

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
﻿
Annual
2024-2025
6
4.	
International Cooperation	
87-92
	
4.1	
Introduction
	
4.2	
Multilateral Cooperation
	
4.3	
Key Achievements
	
4.4	
Bilateral Cooperation
	
	
4.4.1	
Major bilateral engagements
	
	
4.4.2	
International Projects
5.	
Innovate and Design in India	
93-150
	
5.1	
Creation of Research Eco-System
	
	
5.1.1	
National Supercomputing Mission (NSM) & High-Performance Computing (HPC)
	
	
5.1.2	
R&D and IP Development
	
5.2	
Translation R&D
	
	
5.2.1	
Initiatives under Electronics Components and Material Development Programme (EMDP)
	
	
5.2.2	
Technology Development & Demonstration for Indian Industries
	
	
5.2.3	
Initiatives under Microelectronics and Nanotechnology areas
	
5.3	
Centres of Excellence
	
	
5.3.1	
Nanotechnology Centres
	
	
5.3.2	
Centre of Excellence on E-waste Management
	
	
5.3.3	
CoE on Rechargeable Battery Technology (Pre-Cell)
	
	
5.3.4	
CoE on Additive Manufacturing- Optoelectronics Sector
	
	
5.3.5	
Centre for Programmable Photonic Integrated Circuit and Systems (CPPICS)
	
	
5.3.6	
CoE on Additive Manufacturing: Medical Device Sector
	
	
5.3.7	
National Centre on Additive Manufacturing (NCAM)  
	
	
5.3.8	
National Centre for Quantum Manufacturing Technology (NCQMT)
	
	
5.3.9	
Centre for Promotion of Additive Manufacturing: Optical Computing Chips (OCC)
	
	
5.3.10	 Centre for Promotion of Additive Manufacturing - Agri & Food Processing (CPAM – A & FP)
	
	
5.3.11	 National Additive Manufacturing Centre West (NAMC-W)
	
	
5.3.12	 CoE on products based on Li-ion (Post Cell)
	
	
5.3.13	 Centre of Excellence (CoE) in Intelligent Internet of Things (IIoT) Sensors
	
	
5.3.14	 India Innovation Centre for Graphene (IICG)
	
	
5.3.15	 National Centre for Quantum Accelerator Chip using Lithium Niobate (NCQAC)

﻿
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
7
	
	
5.3.16	 Graphene Aurora
	
	
5.3.17	 Startups Innovation & IPR
	
5.4	
Societal Reach R&D
	
	
5.4.1	
Medical Tools, Equipments and Software
	
	
5.4.2	
Training Programmes for Scheduled Caste & Schedule Tribe Communities and North East 
Communities of India
6.	
Internet Governance and Security of Cyber Space	
151-170
	
6.1	
Internet Governance Overview
	
6.2.	
National Internet Exchange of India (NIXI)
	
6.3	
Security of Cyber Space
	
6.4	
R&D initiatives under Cyber Security
	
6.5	
Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In)
	
6.6	
Cyber Laws and Data Governance
7.	
Skill India: Capacity Building	
171-182
	
7.1	
Post Graduate and Doctorate Level
	
7.2	
Graduate level
	
7.3	
Vocational Skill Development Level
	
7.4	
Capacity Building in Niche Areas
	
7.5	
Indian Nanoelectronics Users Program -idea to Innovation (INUP-i2i)
	
7.6	
Development of North-Eastern Region by enhancing the Training/ Education  
capacity in the Information, Electronics & Communications Technology (IECT) Area
	
7.7	
Establishment of Intelligent Educational Infrastructure (Smart) in Eklavya Model  
Residential Schools (EMRSs)
	
7.8	
Grass-Root Level
	
7.9	
IT for Masses Programme
	
7.10	
E-Learning Platform
8.	
Statutory Organisation	
183-192
	
8.1	
Controller of Certifying Authorities (CCA)
 
8.2 
Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI)

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
﻿
Annual
2024-2025
8
9.	
Attached Offices and Societies	
193-270
	
9.1	
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC)
	
9.2	
Society for Applied Microwave Electronics Engineering and Research (SAMEER)
	
9.3	
Centre for Materials for Electronics Technology (C-MET)  
	
9.4	
Education and Research Network (ERNET) India
	
9.5	
National Informatics Centre (NIC)
	
9.6	
National e-Governance Division (NeGD)
 
9.7 
Standardization Testing and Quality Certification Directorate
	
9.8	
National Institute of Electronics and Information Technology (NIELIT)
	
9.9	
Software Technology Parks of India (STPI)
	
9.10	
Digital India Corporation (DIC)
10.	 Other Matters	
271-276
 
10.1 
Use of Official Language Hindi in Official Work
	
10.2	
RTI Matters
	
10.3	
Public Grievances
	
10.4	
Citizens’ Charter	
	
10.5	
Information & Documentation Centre (Library)
	
10.6	
Parliament Section
	
10.7	
 Vigilance Unit
Annexures	
277-284
I.	
Approval of Union Cabinet for extension of the Digital India Programme for  
the duration of 15th Finance Commission
II.	
Annual Budget 2025-26
III.	
Employees structure as on 01.01.2025
IV. 	
List of Abbreviations

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
9
India’s rapid digital transformation has been groundbreaking, placing the nation prominently on the 
global stage. This transformation has driven substantial advancements in ease of living, ease of 
doing business, governance, and the expansion of the digital economy. Through its flagship Digital 
India initiatives, the country has ensured seamless delivery of public services, empowered industries 
and businesses, and enabled informed decision-making within the government. These initiatives 
have profoundly impacted India’s potential to enhance the quality of life for its citizens, achieve self-
reliance, and emerge as a global leader. Moreover, India’s advancements in the electronics supply 
chain have strengthened its position as a trusted global partner, ensuring sustainable growth and 
promoting international collaborations.
The Digital India Programme seeks to provide universal digital services, bridge the digital divide, and 
ensure financial inclusion, and digital empowerment. Digital Public Infrastructure has been pivotal 
in achieving these goals. Aadhaar, the world’s largest digital identity programme, has provided 
unique IDs to more than 130 crore individuals, enabling seamless authentication and eliminating 
duplicate identities. DigiLocker has facilitated paperless governance with over 32 crore registered 
users, reaching 22% of the population. It has also integrated with e-District services across 30 
states, making government services more accessible. The Unified Mobile Application for New-Age 
Governance (UMANG) has transformed ease of living by offering over 1,700 services on a single 
platform, enabling citizens to access government services anytime, anywhere, with just a few clicks.
The Digital Infrastructure for Knowledge Sharing (DIKSHA) platform, developed by NIC, is recognized 
as the world’s largest education platform, and has hosted over 6,800 textbooks and 20,677 capacity-
building courses. To prevent duplication and fragmentation in e-governance projects, the government 
introduced OpenForge- a platform promoting open-source software and sharing of e-governance-
related source code. OpenForge has registered 14,164 users, and 3,083 projects have been 
onboarded so far, enhancing transparency and collaboration in governance.
Other platforms like Government e-Marketplace (GeM) and API Setu have streamlined governance 
and enhanced citizen access to services. India’s digital health infrastructure has revolutionized 
healthcare delivery through platforms such as eSanjeevani (telemedicine) and e-Hospital (hospital 
management). These initiatives, collectively referred to as India’s “Techade,” underscore the nation’s 
leadership in digital governance, benefiting citizens and serving as a model for other countries.
Executive Summary

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
﻿
Annual
2024-2025
10
 To promote indigenous manufacturing, the government has introduced programmes like the Semicon India Programme 
(SIP), Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for Large Scale Electronics Manufacturing, PLI Scheme 2.0 for IT 
Hardware, Scheme for Promotion of Manufacturing of Electronic Components and Semiconductors (SPECS), and 
Modified Electronics Manufacturing Clusters (EMC 2.0) Scheme. These initiatives aim to transform India into a hub for 
electronics production and semiconductor manufacturing. The electronics sector has witnessed remarkable growth, 
with domestic production increasing from INR 5.54 lakh crore (~USD 76 billion) in FY 2020-21 to INR 9.52 lakh crore 
(~USD 115 billion) in FY 2023-24, reflecting a Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 19.78%. Projections indicate 
that India’s electronics production will reach USD 300 billion by 2026. Semicon India Programme (SIP) aims to provide 
financial support to companies investing in semiconductors, display manufacturing and design ecosystem. Under SIP, 
five projects of private sector players has been approved for setting up facilities to develop indigenous semiconductor 
technologies. 
India has established itself as a global IT services hub and has emerged as the World’s 3rd largest start-up ecosystem 
with more than 1,50,000 startups operating in the country and 115 unicorns with a total valuation of more than $ 350 
Bn. The Indian IT/ ITeS industry has a leading position globally and has been progressively contributing to the growth 
of exports and the creation of employment opportunities. India’s IT-BPM industry is expected to grew by ~3.7 % to 
reach at USD 254 Billion, including exports of 199.5 USD Billion in FY2023-24 (E). India has positioned itself as a 
major hub for Global Capability Centres (GCCs), providing offshore facilities to multinational corporations (MNCs) for 
managing business operations. These centres are among the fast-growing segments of India’s digital economy. To 
further accelerate its expansion, MeitY is developing a new policy framework that will provide fresh incentives for these 
centres. Several Centres of Excellence (CoEs) have been set up to promote startups, incubation, and innovation in 
these areas. Furthermore, initiatives like the Future Skills Programme are also enabling Indian IT professionals to attain 
world-class skills in these technologies.
India has emerged as a key player in artificial intelligence and emerging technologies. On 7th March 2024, the 
Government of India has approved the IndiaAI Mission, a comprehensive national-level programme to democratize and 
catalyze the AI innovation ecosystem in the country and ensure the global competitiveness of India’s AI startups and 
researchers. The Government of India hosted the ‘Global IndiaAI Summit’ on July 3-4, 2024, in New Delhi. The summit 
focused on advancing AI development in areas like Compute Capacity, Foundational Models, Datasets, Application 
Development, Future Skills, Startup Financing, and Safe AI, which are the seven key pillars of IndiaAi Mission.
Self-reliance on advanced technologies is a key pillar for the sustainability and consistent growth of the digital economy. 
In this regard, MeitY has initiated the National Supercomputing Mission (NSM) to develop indigenous computing systems, 
encompassing HPC components such as processors, server boards, interconnects, clusters, and cooling systems. 
Under Phase 3, nine PARAM Rudra systems have been deployed at various locations. Operational installations include 
3.0 PF systems at IUAC Delhi, IIT Madras, and IIT Mumbai; a 1 PF system at GMRT-TIFR Pune; and 838 TF systems 
at SN Bose NCBS Kolkata, IIT Patna, and IIT Jammu. Furthermore, C-DAC has partnered with MosChip and Socionext 

﻿
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
11
to design and develop high-performance computing processors based on Arm architecture, further advancing India’s 
technological capabilities. It has also developed systems of strategic importance to the nation’s defense, space, and 
atomic energy programs, delivering reliability and high performance. 
To drive innovation in emerging technologies, MeitY has established Centre of Excellence (CoE) in Intelligent Internet 
of Things (IIoT) Sensors to catalyze the development of sensors within the realm of Intelligent IoT systems. Additionally, 
it has also established India’s first Graphene Centre, the India Innovation Centre for Graphene (IICG) to promote R&D, 
product innovation and capacity building in the area of Graphene and 2D material systems. 
Multilateral forums like the 3rd Voice of Global South Summit emphasized leveraging Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) 
for development, particularly in the Global South. Bilateral discussions, such as the 1st India-Singapore Semiconductor 
Policy Dialogue, highlighted collaboration in supply chains, R&D, and workforce development. India-US Information 
and Communications Technology Working Group (ICTWG) Meeting held on October 17, 2024, facilitated discussions 
on topics like IT/IT-enabled services, digital talent, cross-border data flows, data privacy, and collaboration in AI, 
semiconductor manufacturing, and telecommunications.
To exhibit India’s prowess in the electronics and IT sectors, MeitY has initiated joint projects with various countries. 
India and the EU launched a joint call for proposals on HPC applications under the Intent of Cooperation (IoC) on 
High-Performance Computing (HPC), Weather Extremes & Climate Modeling, and Quantum Technologies. The 
India-Argentina Centre of Excellence in Information Technology (IA-CEIT), established by C-DAC Delhi with financial 
assistance from the Government of India at the University of Hurlingham, Buenos Aires, aims to foster technological 
advancements and collaboration. 
MeitY has taken significant steps to create a trustable cyber environment which is essential for the participation of 
citizens in the digital economy. The Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 has been enacted, which provides for 
the processing of digital personal data in a manner that recognizes both the rights of the individuals to protect their 
personal data and the need to process such personal data for lawful purposes and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. Building on this, the draft Digital Personal Data Protection (DPDP) Rules, 2025, introduced for 
stakeholder consultation balances privacy in the digital space while encouraging data-driven innovation. Also, initiatives 
like the Cyber Security Grand Challenge for Start-ups and the Cyber Surakshit Bharat have strengthened the country’s 
cybersecurity framework.
MeitY has also focused on bridging human resource gaps in the electronics and IT industry through initiatives targeting 
both formal and informal sectors. Key programmes like the Indian Nanoelectronics Users Programme – Idea to 
Innovation (INUP-i2i) and the Chips to Startup (C2S) Programme aim to train professionals in advanced areas such as 
nanoelectronics and chip design. Additionally, the Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme aims to enhance the number of PhDs in 
Electronics System Design & Manufacturing (ESDM) and IT/IT Enabled Services (IT/ITES) sectors in the country. The 
Phase II of the scheme has received proposals from 70 institutions for the allotment of 2,142 full-time and 700 part-time 
PhD seats.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
﻿
Annual
2024-2025
12
The Annual Report 2024-25 of MeitY highlights the ministry’s achievements and its organizations, including CCA, 
UIDAI, CERT-In, NIC, C-DAC, SAMEER, C-MET, NeGD, NIELIT, STPI, STQC, DIC, ERNET, and NIXI. The report 
underscores MeitY’s focus on citizen-centricity, digital governance, DPI, digital connectivity, digital skilling, emerging 
technologies, cybersecurity, and electronics manufacturing. Collectively, these efforts have empowered citizens, 
strengthened the digital economy, and fostered technological innovation. They form a robust foundation for achieving 
the vision of Viksit Bharat by 2047—a digitally empowered, inclusive, and self-reliant India.

CHAPTER
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
13
1.1	
Introduction
	
Ministry 
of 
Electronics 
and 
Information 
Technology (MeitY) is responsible for formulation, 
implementation and review of national policies in 
the field of Information Technology, Electronics 
and Internet (all matters other than licensing of 
Internet Service Provider).
1.2	
Vision
	
e-Development of India as the engine for transition 
into a developed nation and an empowered society.
1.3	
Mission 
	
To 
promote 
e-Governance 
for 
empowering 
citizens, promoting the inclusive and sustainable 
growth of the Electronics, IT and ITeS industries, 
enhancing India’s role in Internet Governance, 
adopting a multipronged approach that includes 
development of human resources, promoting R&D 
and innovation, enhancing efficiency through digital 
services and ensuring a secure cyber space. 
1.4	
Objectives 
	
e-Government: Providing e-infrastructure for 
delivery of e-services. 
	
e-Industry: Promotion of electronics hardware 
manufacturing and IT-ITeS industry. 
	
e-Innovation/R&D: 
Implementation 
of 
R&D 
Framework - Enabling creation of Innovation/ 
R&D Infrastructure in emerging areas of ICT&E/
Establishment of mechanism for R&D translation. 
	
e-Learning: Providing support for development of 
e-Skills and Knowledge network. 
	
e-Security: Securing India’s cyber space. 
	
e-Inclusion: Promoting the use of ICT for more 
inclusive growth.
	
Internet Governance: Enhancing India’s role in 
Global Platforms of Internet Governance.
1.5	
Functions
1.	
Policy matters relating to information technology; 
Electronics; and Internet (all matters other than 
licensing of Internet Service Provider). 
2.	
	Promotion of internet, IT and IT enabled services. 
2A.	
Promotion of Digital Transactions excluding Digital 
Payments. 
3. 	
Assistance to other departments in the promotion 
of E-Governance, E- Commerce, E- Medicine, E- 
Infrastructure, etc. 
4. 	
Promotion of Information Technology education 
and Information Technology-based education. 
5.	
Matters relating to Cyber Laws, administration of 
the Information Technology Act. 2000 (21 of 2000) 
and other IT related laws.
5A.	
Matters relating to online gaming.
5B.	
Matters relating to Cyber Security as assigned in 
the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000) 
(as amended from time to time) and support to 
other Ministries / Departments on Cyber Security. 
6. 	
Matters relating to promotion and manufacturing of 
Semiconductor Devices in the country. 
7. 	
Interaction in IT related matters with international 
agencies and bodies e.g. Internet for Business 
Limited (IFB), Institute for Education in Information 
Society (IBI) and International Code Council – on 
line (ICC). 
8. 	
Initiative on bridging the Digital Divide: Matters 
relating to Digital India Corporation.
9. 	
Promotion of Standardization, Testing and Quality 
Vision, Mission, Objectives, 
Structure and Functions of MeitY
Overview of MeitY
1

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Overview of MeitY
Annual
2024-2025
14
in IT and standardization of procedure for IT 
application and Tasks. 
10. 	 Electronics 
Export 
and 
Computer 
Software 
Promotion Council (ESC). 
11. 	 National Informatics Centre (NIC). 
12. 	 Initiatives for development of Hardware/Software 
industry including knowledge– based enterprises, 
measures 
for 
promoting 
IT 
exports 
and 
competitiveness of the industry. 
13. 	 All matters relating to personnel under the control 
of the Ministry. 
14.  Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI). 
15. 	 Semi-Conductor Laboratory, Mohali.
1.6	
WORK ALLOCATION – AS ON 31.12.2024
Sl.No.
Name & Designation
Work Allocation
1
Shri Bhuvnesh Kumar 
Additional Secretary
• Personnel, Societies and General Administration, I&DC [Library]
• NICSI 
• Cyber Laws Division [GC-Sci.G(DG)]
• R&D in Electronics Division [GC-Sci.G(SV)]
• R&D in IT Division [GC-Sci.G(SV)]
• Matters related to CMET and CDAC [GC-Sci.G(SV)]
• Matters related to UIDAI [GC-Sci.G(DG)]
2
Shri Abhishek Singh
Additional Secretary
• Cyber Security Division [GC-Sci.G(SU)]
• Matters related to ICERT [GC-Sci.G(SU)]
• Artificial Intelligence & Emerging Technology [GC-Sci.G(KB)]
• Work relating to Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence (GPAI) [GC-Sci. G 
(KB)]
• Human Centred Computing (HCC) Division [GC-Sci.G(KB)]
• India AI [GC-Sci.G(KB)]
• DIBD [GC-Sci.G(KB)]
• HRD, NIELIT and RajBhasha Section [GC-Sci.G(TP)]
3
Shri Krishan Kumar Singh, 
Joint Secretary
• Digital Economy Division (DED) 
• Software Industry Promotion Division including DIIF 
• Start Ups, Innovation, IPR and Entrepreneurship
• STPI, MSH
• Coordination Division (including SGoS)
• CVO
4
Shri Rajesh Singh JS & FA
• Integrated Finance Division (IFD)
5
Shri Sushil Pal
Joint Secretary
• International Cooperation Division
• Electronics Hardware (PLI)
• Semiconductors

Overview of MeitY
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
15
Sl.No.
Name & Designation
Work Allocation
• SCL
• Productivity & Employment Generation
• Electronics Hardware (excluding PLI), CRO [GC-Sci.G(AN)]
• Matters related to STQC and CCA [GC-Sci.G(AN)]
• Internet Governance Division
• NIXI
6
Shri Sanket S Bhondve
Joint Secretary
• Digital Governance Division 
• Digital India Corporation (DIC), NeGD, MyGov, CSC
• BISAG(N) 
• NIC, NISG 
• Designated Officer (u/s 69A) 
7
Smt. Savita Utreja
Scientist G & GC
• Cyber Security Division [through AS(AS)]
• ICERT [through AS(AS)]
8
Smt. Asha Nangia 
Scientist G & GC
• Electronics Hardware (excluding PLI), CRO [through JS(SP)]
• Matters related to STQC and CCA [through JS(SP)]
9
Shri S K Marwaha
Scientist G & GC
• CC&BT Division 
• SAMEER, ERNET 
• RTI, Grievances and Parliament Section
10
Smt. Sunita Verma
Scientist G & GC
• R&D in Electronics Division [through AS(BK)]
• R&D in IT Division [through AS(BK)]
• CMET, CDAC [through AS(BK)]
11
Smt. Kavita Bhatia
Scientist G & GC
• Artificial Intelligence & Emerging Technology [through AS(AS)] 
• Work relating to Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence (GPAI) [through 
AS(AS)]
• Human Centred Computing (HCC) Division [through AS(AS)]
• India AI [through AS(AS)] 
• DIBD [through AS(AS)]
 12
Shri Deepak Goel
Scientist G & GC
• Cyber Laws Division [through AS(BK)]
• Matters related to UIDAI [through AS(BK)]
13
Ms. Tulika Pandey
Scientist G & GC
• HRD, NIELIT and RajBhasha Section [through AS(AS)]
• Nodal Officer for responding to any queries/ clarifications sought in writing/
through email by any media companies on any issues related to MeitY.
• Website and Social Media activities.
• Gender Budgeting

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Overview of MeitY
Annual
2024-2025
16
1.7	
Organisation Structure
The Secretariat of MeitY headed by Secretary is assisted by Financial Advisor, and Group Coordinators and Heads of 
Organisations under the administrative control of MeitY. The organisation chart is as follows:-
 

CHAPTER
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
17
2.1	
Introduction
Digital India, a flagship programme of the Government of 
India, aims to transform India into a digitally empowered 
society and knowledge economy. It weaves together 
a large number of ideas and thoughts into a single 
comprehensive vision so that each of them is seen 
as part of a larger goal. The focus of the Digital India 
Programme (DIP) is on being transformative to realize 
- IT (Indian Talent) + IT (Information Technology) = IT 
(India Tomorrow) and making technology central to 
enable change. The programme targets to provide 
digital services, digital access, bridge the digital divide, 
language divide and thereby, ensure digital inclusion, 
financial inclusion, and digital empowerment. The targets 
are sought to be achieved with the power of technology 
that is affordable, developmental, sustainable, and 
inclusive. The vision is centred on three key areas, namely 
Infrastructure as Utility to Every Citizen, Governance 
& Services on Demand and Digital Empowerment of 
Citizens.
2.1.1	 Extension of Digital India Programme
The Government, in August 2023, approved the extension 
of the ‘DIP’ with a total outlay of Rs. 14,903.25 Crore 
during the period of the 15th Finance Commission i.e., 
2021-22 to 2025-26. The details are given at Annexure-I.
2.1.2	 Vision of Digital India
To transform India into a digitally empowered society and 
knowledge economy.
Vision Area 1: Digital Infrastructure as a Utility to 
Every Citizen includes:
•	
High-speed internet as a core utility
•	
Cradle to grave digital identity - unique, lifelong, 
online, authenticable
•	
Mobile phone & Bank account enabling participation 
in digital & financial space
•	
Easy access to a Common Service Centre
•	
Shareable private space on a public cloud
•	
Safe and secure Cyber-space
Vision Area 2: Governance & Services on Demand 
includes
•	
Seamlessly integrated across departments or 
jurisdictions
•	
Services available in real-time from online & mobile 
platforms
•	
All citizen entitlements to be available on the cloud
•	
Services digitally transformed for improving Ease 
of Doing Business
• 
Making financial transactions electronic & cashless
•	
Leveraging GIS for decision support systems & 
development
Vision Area 3: Digital Empowerment of Citizens 
includes:
•	
Universal Digital Literacy
•	
Universally accessible digital resources
• 
All documents/ certificates to be available on the 
cloud
2.2 	 Digital Infrastructure
2.2.1 	Digital Identity
2.2.1.1	  Aadhaar Data Vault (ADV) as a service 
• 
While using Aadhaar services of UIDAI, if any 
service/application requires to store Aadhaar 
number in their application, the same should be 
stored in encrypted format in a separate system 
‘Aadhaar Data Vault (ADV)’. In order to facilitate 
Power to Empower
Digital India
2

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
18
the same, this project has been initiated. Aadhaar 
Data Vault as a service is used by major entities, 
including the Election Commission of India (ECI), 
Oil Marketing Companies (OMC), All India Council 
for Technical Education (AICTE), Life Insurance 
Corporation (LIC), Small Industries Development 
Bank of India (SIDBI), Central Registrar of 
Cooperative Societies (CRCS), and the National 
Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
(NABARD), among others. ADV is also offered as 
a solution with extended capabilities to interested 
entities for securely storing and managing other 
Personally Identifiable Information (PII) data.
• 
Currently, 50 departments are utilizing this service. 
Total number of transactions are 272.33 Crore.
Projections for January – March 2025 of ADV 
5 services more will be utilizing this service. Targeting a 
total of 300 crore transactions. 
2.2.1.2	 MeriPehchaan 
[National 
Single 
Sign-On 
(NSSO) platform]
National Single Sign On (MeriPehchaan) is a platform 
that authenticates citizens easily and securely. It aims 
at eliminating the need to repeatedly prove user identity 
to different applications and hold different credentials 
for each application. It is an extensive collaboration 
of the three mainstream SSO platforms e-Pramaan, 
Jan Parichay and DigiLocker. MeriPehchaan enables 
standardized registration which means users need 
to provide information once for accessing different 
services. MeriPehchaan authenticates the user based 
on multiple authentication parameters like username, 
mobile number, Aadhaar, PAN, etc. 
Achievements
• 
Currently 12,309 services of various Ministries/
States have been integrated with NSSO. Key 
services include COWIN, DigiLocker, eShram, 
Mizoram DICT, Service Plus, mSevanam, MyGov, 
S3Waas, Bihar State Services, Rajasthan SSO, 
Assam Sewasetu, Digishakti, ISRO, Jansugam, 
MP Single Sign On, Kerala Excise etc
• 
Over 133.97 Crore transactions have taken place 
on the MeriPehchaan platform.
Projections for January – March 2025 of NSSO.
•	
Number of services – approx. 400
•	
Number of transactions – approx. 15 cr
2.2.1.3	 Online e-Sign (e-Hastakshar)
e-Hastakshar, a cutting-edge eSign service that allows 
citizens to digitally sign documents online in real-time, 
providing a legally acceptable form and convenient 
alternative to physical signatures. Over the past year, 
C-DAC integrated this service with various departments, 
ministries, and agencies at the Central and State 
Government levels, as well as Union Territories. C-DAC 
utilizes service of Unique Identification Authority of India 
(UIDAI) for on-line authentication and Aadhaar eKYC 
service. e-Hastakshar service supports Online Aadhaar 
Authentication Modes-One-time password (OTP), TOTP, 
Fingerprint, IRIS, Face (Mobile Apps only) based modes 
of authentication for leveraging eKYC service of UIDAI.
Achievements 
• 
Total 87.25 Crore e-Sign issued by all ESPs. Out 
of these, 21.20 Crore e-Sign issued by CDAC (i.e. 
under e-Hastakshar project).
• 
eHastakshar APK is available on Google play store 
and GOV.IN AppStore.
• 
Currently more than 260 agencies are leveraging 
eSign 2.1 Production service. Key agencies 
such as Tamil Nadu e-Governance Agency 
(TNeGA), 
National 
Crime 
Records 
Bureau 
(NCRB), Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation 
(EPFO), National Informatics Centre, Centre for 
eGovernance, Karnataka, Digilocker, National 
Highways Authority of India (NHAI), Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmer Welfare are using eSign 
2.1 on production level.
• 
15 outreach programs have been conducted by 
C-DAC for e-Sign proliferation in the year 2024 with 
various Central/State Government organizations.
Projections for January – March 2025 of eSign
• 
Total e-Sign will be issued by all ESPs: 20.00 Cr.
• 
Out of these, e-Sign issued by CDAC (i.e. under 
e-Hastakshara project): 4.00 Cr. 15 more agencies 
will be leveraging eSign 2.1 Production service.

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
19
2.2.2	 Enhancement of National Informatics Centre 
(NIC) National Cloud Services
National Informatics Centre (NIC) has been providing 
Data Centre/ Cloud services to the Government at Central 
and State level to ensure Government services internally 
and for citizens. Under NIC cloud services, more than 
21,000 virtual servers have been allocated for various 
e-Governance applications to more than 1470 Ministries/ 
users and over 5000 websites of the Government are 
being served through NIC cloud. For rapid deployment 
of new services and strengthen the existing services 
to citizens from the Government, MeitY has approved 
a proposal of NIC for enhancement of ongoing NIC 
National Cloud Services being offered from National 
Data Centres over a period of 3 years. The project is 
being implemented by NICSI. 
The project has the following key features:-
i.	
Cloud Infrastructure Capacity: This will enable the 
provision of around 14,000 medium/small sized 
virtual servers over the period of three years. This 
infrastructure will provide additional Block/ Unified/ 
Object/ Software defined raw storage of over 36 
Petabytes.
ii.	
Cloud Management solution: It will ensure increase 
automations of function to enhance quality of 
services, which will result in better adoption of 
Cloud services and reduce the overall manpower 
requirement
iii.	
Improvement in Cyber Security Posture: It would 
help NIC to manage various cybersecurity aspects 
of the cloud infrastructure.
iv.	
Workshop/Training of Cloud Services: Workshops/
trainings of core teams of Government Ministries/ 
Departments which enables the users for utilization/
managing and monitoring of cloud services
2.2.3	 National Data Centre in North-East Region 
(NDC-NER)
To strengthen the digital transformation and service 
delivery in the North-Eastern Region, Ministry of 
Electronics and IT has approved the project for setting 
up of “National Data Centre in North-East Region (NDC-
NER)” at Guwahati, Assam on 19th September 2020. 
This project is in line with “Vision Document for Digital 
North-East by 2020”. This Project is being implemented 
by National Informatics Centre (NIC) through NICSI over 
a period of five and a half years.
The NDC-NER is proposed with the following key 
features:
i. 
NDC-NER building with Ground plus 5 floors with 
a facility of 200 racks (G+3) for Data Centre and 
Cloud infrastructure (IT and Non-IT). 4th and 5th floor 
shall be built and reserved for future expansion.
ii.	
It would provide a robust, highly available & 
significantly scalable infrastructure with adequate 
redundancy to enable Government to render 
efficient delivery of citizen services.
iii.	
It will have Security Operation Centre (SOC), 
Network Operation Centre (NOC) and Centre of 
Excellence (CoE) for Application Security. It will act 
as Disaster Recovery site for various applications 
hosted in other Data Centre in the region.
2.2.4	 GI Cloud (MeghRaj)
To deliver ICT services over Cloud to all the Ministries/
Departments at Centre/State/UTs level and utilize the 
benefits of Cloud computing, Government of India has 
initiated an ambitious initiative- “GI Cloud”, also named 
as ‘MeghRaj’. It is designed to promote the use of Cloud 
technology to enhance the efficiency, scalability, and 
cost-effectiveness of IT services within the Government. 
The vision of this initiative is to accelerate delivery of 
e-Services in the country, while optimizing ICT spending 
of the Government. 
This will ensure optimum utilization of the infrastructure 
and speed up the development and deployment of 
eGov applications. The architectural vision of GI 
Cloud encompasses a set of discrete cloud computing 
environments spread across multiple locations, built on 
existing or new (augmented) infrastructure, following 
a set of common protocols, guidelines and standards 
issued by the Government of India.
The major components of MeghRaj include:
• 
Setting up of State and National Clouds.
• 
Empanelment of Cloud Service Providers.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
20
• 
Setting up of Cloud Management Office (Policies, 
Guidelines, templates, security norms, certification, 
etc.).
• 
Awareness 
workshops, 
training 
programmes 
and migration support for cloud adoption by 
Departments.
• 
Setting up of Clouds by other Government entities.
• 
Rapid development, deployment, and re-use of 
ICT applications.
• 
Enable conversion of CAPEX to OPEX paving 
the way for consumption based billing and faster 
procurement of IT Infrastructure services.
Achievements
The first National Cloud implemented by NIC is 
already being used by more than 1,895 applications of 
Government Departments. NIC Cloud can be accessed 
using the following link: https://cloud.gov.in/
MeitY has empanelled 23 Cloud Service Providers for a 
variety of Cloud deployment models (Public Cloud, Virtual 
Private Cloud, and Government Community Cloud) and 
Cloud Service offerings (IaaS, & PaaS). The status of 
the audit and the contact details of the empanelled CSPs 
can be assessed using the link https://www.meity.gov.in/
content/gi-cloud-meghraj
2.2.5	 Bhaskaracharya National Institute for Space 
Applications and Geo-informatics (BISAG-N)
Bhaskaracharya National Institute for Space Applications 
and Geo-informatics (BISAG-N) is an Autonomous 
Scientific Society registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 under the Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology (MeitY), Government of India 
to undertake Technology Development & Management, 
Research 
& 
Development, 
Facilitate 
National 
& 
International Cooperation and Capacity Building, Support 
Technology Transfer & Entrepreneurship Development 
in area of Geo-spatial Technology/Field.
Some of the key achievements and the activities 
performed by BISAG-N are as follows: 
I.	
SATELLITE COMMUNICATION / DISTANCE 
EDUCATION / EDUCATIONAL TV
	
Government has established a state-of-the-art 
telecast facility through MeitY at BISAG-N. At 
present, 300+ educational DTH TV channels 
(SWAYAM Prabha, PM eVidya, DigiShala, VANDE 
Gujarat) are being telecast on 24x7 basis using 
this facility.
	
BISAG-N has utilized satellite communication 
infrastructure to create a nationwide distance 
education platform, focusing on inclusivity and 
accessibility. The PM eVIDYA initiative, one of 
BISAG-N’s prominent projects, provides DTH 
television channels dedicated to school education, 
helping bridge educational disparities, particularly 
in rural and remote areas where internet access 
may be limited. This project involves collaboration 
with several ministries, including Education, 
Information and Broadcasting, and Space, making 
it possible to reach millions of households. BISAG-
N’s satellite communication services have also 
been deployed for training programs in agriculture, 
healthcare, and skill development, thus broadening 
its impact on social welfare.
II.	
SPACE AND GEO-SPATIAL TECHNOLOGY - 
BASED APPLICATIONS DEVELOPMENT
	
BISAG-N has built extensive, high-resolution 
geospatial databases and analytical tools to 
serve multiple sectors, including agriculture, 
water resources, urban planning, and disaster 
management. BISAG-N also provides data and 
analysis on aspects like disaster risk, resource 
allocation, and development planning.
III.	
PM GATISHAKTI: NATIONAL MASTER PLAN 
FOR MULTIMODAL CONNECTIVITY
	
BISAG-N has developed Geo-spatial and other 
emerging technologies based platform to support 
National Master Plan for Multi-modal Connectivity 
under the guidance of Department for Promotion 
of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT), Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry, GoI. All the technologies 
used are developed in-house/ Customized open 
source, under the R&D Programme of MeitY. 
The main objectives of the National Master Plan 
are to support infrastructure planning, optimize 
Logistics process, measure, monitor and report 
the Performance of states, various government 

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
21
bodies, ministries and comparison with global 
benchmarks. Under PM GatiShakti National 
Master Plan, BISAG-N has developed portals for 
more than 46 Ministries and State Governments 
and more than 1600 data layers are integrated 
under the PM Gatishakti Portal. 
IV.	
AYUSH GRID PROJECT
	
The Ministry of AYUSH, under Government of 
India, has envisioned the AYUSH Grid Project 
with the aim of digitizing healthcare services in the 
AYUSH sector comprehensively. BISAG-N is the 
technical support partner for Ministry of AYUSH 
in the implementation of AYUSH Grid Project. 
This project intends to serve as fundamental 
IT infrastructure for the entire AYUSH sector, 
encompassing various healthcare systems like 
Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, 
Sowa Rigpa, and Homoeopathy across their 
respective functional domains, including health 
services, education, research, drug administration, 
medicinal plants, Ministry of AYUSH oversight, 
capacity building, and media outreach. Through 
AYUSH Grid project access is provided to citizens 
through a dedicated portal and Mobile application. 
V.	
DEFENCE PROJECTS
	
BISAG-N has been developing Space, Geo-
spatial and other emerging technologies based 
applications under the guidance of various 
agencies of the Ministry of Defence, Government 
of India. All the technologies used are developed 
in-house/ Customized open source. 
	
Ongoing projects: Apart from the above some 
ongoing projects like PM Daksh, PM UDAY, 
Government Land Management System (GLMS), 
Heritage Atlas, India Industrial Land Bank 
(IILB), Haj Suvidha, Purvottar Vikas Setu etc. 
are under various phases of development and 
implementation.
VI.	
STANDARDIZATION, 
QUALITY 
AND 
INFORMATION SECURITY DIRECTORATE AT 
BISAG-N
	
BISAG-N ensures quality and data integrity through 
adherence to international standards such as ISO 
9001 for Quality Management, ISO 27001 for 
Information Security, and CMMI Level 5 certification 
for software development. Its Standardization 
Directorate 
develops 
and 
implements 
best 
practices 
for 
geospatial 
data 
management, 
promoting data consistency and interoperability 
across governmental systems. Capacity building 
efforts include training for government officials, 
students, and professionals through the Academy 
of Geo-Informatics & Sustainable Development.
VII.	
ACADEMY OF GEO-INFORMATICS
	
BISAG-N has established an Academy of Geo-
Informatics to promote and carry out applied 
research, provide education and training to 
students and professionals to encourage the 
development 
of 
advanced 
Geo 
informatics 
technology and applications. In the past year 
BISAG-N trained approx. 200 students in different 
technical languages such as Python, Java, PHP, 
JAVA Script, ML, GIS, Android etc.
VIII.	 FINISHING SCHOOL
	
BISAG-N continued it six-month training with 
stipend of ` 10000/month for SC/ST graduates 
to improve their employability. During the six 
months, the participants are assessed for their 
skills vis-à-vis industry needs. Based on the 
assessment, extensive guidance is provided along 
with opportunity to participate in GIS projects. 
Soft skills and interview practice are integral part 
of this programme. Interviews are arranged at 
BISAG-N for relevant companies to support career 
opportunities and placement.
IX.	
INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION
	
The Government through Ministry of External Af-
fairs (MEA) desires to use the SAARC satellite 
(designated GSAT-9), among other things, for DTH 
applications in neighborhood countries. For this 
purpose, MEA engaged with neighborhood coun-
tries to appraise them of the features of the collab-
orative program being offered by India for educa-
tion and skill development through satellite com-
munication. 50 DTH TV Channels are dedicated 
to the telecast of educational & skill Development 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
22
videos. These 50 DTH TV channels will operate 
in 24x7 mode. The channels will be uplinked from 
BISAG-N, Gandhinagar SATCOM infrastructure.
X.	
OUTREACH PROGRAMMES
	
BISAG-N conducted various outreach programmes 
for school students/professionals and Government 
officials highlighting the activities undertaken by 
BISAG-N. These activities majorly highlight the use 
of GIS and Geospatial technologies in Government 
for effective planning and implementation of various 
Government projects and Programmes.
2.2.6	 Public Internet Access Programme including 
Wi-Fi in Universities
Wi-Fi has become a universal expectation among 
universities / institutions for students, faculty and staff 
as well as visitors / guests. Wi-Fi connectivity is a high-
speed wireless access to Internet / Intranet resources on 
any-time any-where basis across the campus. 
Wi-Fi at Patna University
A model Wi-Fi-enabled campus network has been 
set up by ERNET India at Patna University with Tier-
3 architecture, upgraded to a 10-Gigabit fiber optic 
redundant backbone. It is a controller-based secure Wi-Fi 
network with a centralized monitoring and management 
system. This network provides high-speed wireless 
access to Internet and Intranet resources for campus 
employees, staff, faculty, teachers, students, official 
visitors, and guests on a seamless, any-time, anywhere 
basis across the campus. The establishment of the Wi-Fi 
network has significantly enhanced the delivery of student-
centric services, improved employee performance and 
operational efficiency, and ensured real-time access to 
critical information. It has driven substantial progress in 
both academic and administrative functions by providing a 
reliable and high-speed internet infrastructure across the 
campus. This enables students and faculty to efficiently 
engage in online learning, conduct research, and access 
digital resources, fostering personal development, skill 
enhancement, and the adoption of innovative teaching 
practices. The Wi-Fi campus network has been deployed 
across all three zones and has been operational since 
5th March 2024. Approximately 700 to 1,000 users, 
including professors, students, and staff, are accessing 
the network daily. The Eduroam facility has also been 
enabled for Patna University by ERNET India.
2.3	
Mobile based online Governance and Services 
on Demand
2.3.1 India Portal 
India Portal provides a ‘single-window access’ to infor-
mation and services that are electronically delivered from 
all Government departments, institutions, and organisa-
tions. It has been a most popular source of information to 
a wide range of stakeholders - from citizens, to Govern-
ment, to business and to Indian diaspora. It is a gateway 
of Indian Government websites at Centre, State and Dis-
trict levels. The portal is also integrated with MyGov and 
Data Portal to present the citizen engagement activities 
and open data across various sectors.
The India Portal has over 3.3 million visitors per month 
(7.0 million-page views) and 10.05 lakh registered users. 
Till date, India Portal has published ~26,346 metadata. 
India Portal is also a platform for the promotion of various 
Government initiatives/ events such as: 
• 
Micro site for Republic Day showcasing the 
Republic Day celebrations, President’s speech to 
the nation and awardees of various awards that 
has been designed, developed, and maintained 
at 
https://knowindia.india.gov.in/republic-day-
celebration/index.php
• 
Micro site for Independence Day which is main-
tained at https://knowindia.india.gov.in/indepen-
dence-day-celebration/index.php 
• 
Spotlights 
covering 
important 
Government 
initiatives and events like Building Atmanirbhar 
Bharat, Helping MSMEs Grow & Reviving 
Economy, Educating Young Minds & Building a 
Stronger Nation, PM Street Vendor’s AtmaNirbhar 
Nidhi (PM SVANidhi), SVAMITVA - Integrated 
Property Validation for Rural India. 
• 
Monthly newsletters that are sent to subscribers of 
India Portal to keep them updated about the latest 
content on the portal. The portal also has a Social 
Media presence through Facebook page (https://
www.facebook.com/National Portal India) and 
Twitter handle (https://twitter.com/indiagovin).

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
23
Other initiatives/activities under the aegis of India Portal are: 
• 
Enable Government Departments to improve 
their quality-of-service delivery through citizens’ 
feedback.
• 
Enable Government Departments to conduct any 
kind of surveys for better planning.
• 
Build capacities within Government for better UI/
UX and design thinking in order to improve ease 
of access and navigation of Government websites 
and Apps.
Achievements:
• 
Improved and developed the design interface for 
118 websites and 58 mobile applications of Govt. 
Departments under the project till now.
• 
Framework creation and Guidelines prepared for 
Government Departments to adopt better UI/UX. 
• 
To focus on identified pain areas and improve 
services 
accordingly, 
Government 
services 
have been integrated to collect citizen feedback. 
This 
initiative 
has 
provided 
a 
department 
centric advanced analytical report with service 
improvement indicator so that department can 
focus on those areas.
2.3.2	 User experience for Government (Websites & 
Apps) UI/UX 4G
To adapt best practices by government Departments 
in UI/UX (User Interface/User experience) a project 
named as “User Experience for Government Websites 
& Apps (UX4G)” also known as UI/UX4G was launched 
and it is mainly focussed to examine GIGW compliance 
of Government websites/ apps, to identify areas of 
improvement in UI/UX, create a framework and guidelines 
to help Government Departments to adopt better UI/
UX, develop libraries of GIGW compliant ready to use, 
reusable Web Components, sensitize them and extend 
necessary technical hand-holding support on use of web 
components for improving the quality of UI/UX. 
Project Objectives:
• 
Act as an enabler and facilitator in developing 
a framework and guidelines for user centric 
experience on Government Websites & Mobile 
Apps, especially the UI/UX for ease of use.
• 
Provide ready to use web components, tools, 
solutions, technical support, etc. for Government 
Departments so that they can provide best user 
experience.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
24
• 
Government departments has been sensitized and 
necessary technical hand holding support been 
extended on the use of web-components.
• 
For better UI/UX and design aspects of Government 
websites/apps 
various 
training 
programs, 
workshops and hackathon has been conducted 
in the field of UI/UX for Government departments. 
So far, 42 workshops have been conducted online 
under the UX Capacity building program.
• 
Repository to use design templates prepared for 
Government Ministries/ Departments at Centre & 
State level. These design templates are compliant 
with Government guidelines & e-Gov Standards.
• 
Library development of GIGW compliance.
2.3.3	 National Scholarships Portal (NSP) 
National Scholarships Portal (NSP) is an end-to-end 
integrated unified portal for all scholarship schemes 
offered by Central Ministries/Departments and states. 
NSP offers hassle-free services to all stakeholders like 
online scholarship application submission, tracking by 
student’s verification by institute and final disbursement 
of scholarships amount directly into a student’s bank 
account. This new unified system creates brings 
transparency by avoiding duplication and ensures timely 
disbursement.
Impact: NSP statistics for AY 2023-24
• 
Central Ministries/State On-boarded: 32
• 
Schemes Onboarded: 142
• 
Beneficiaries: 0.80 crore (approx.)
• 
Scholarship Disbursement: Rs. 6,224.40 crore 
(approx.)
Commutatively, in last Eight Academic years (2015-16, 
16-17, 17-18, 18-19, 19-20, 20-21, 21-22, 22-23, 23-24) 
approximately 11.83 crore applications received and 
Approx. Rs. 33,889.13 crores disbursed to over 6.15 
crore beneficiaries.
2.3.4	 DigiLocker: 
Revolutionizing 
Paperless 
Governance
In the pursuit of achieving a vision for paperless 
governance, DigiLocker has emerged as revolutionary in 
the issuance and authentication of digital documents and 
certificates, rendering physical paperwork obsolete. The 
year 2024-25 so far has witnessed remarkable progress 
and transformative developments in the DigiLocker 
ecosystem with 29% growth in partner alliances and 
around 50% growth in user registration (April-Sept) from 
the previous year which signifies adaption of the services 
with secure and robust accessibility. Over 43 Crore 
registered users now and growing rapidly, DigiLocker 
has now reached to 31% of the total population.
Statistics
Key Achievements:
• 
Integrated with e-District services of 30 States, 
facilitating easier access to government services; 
Integration of services of MahaIT and 2 UTs 
in progress. Public Distribution System (PDS) 
services integrated for 30 States. Integrated with 
Land Records of 8 States for better access to 
property-related records. Integrated with Electricity 
Bills of 8 States, streamlining bill management for 
citizens. Integrated with Pension Documents of 17 
states, making it easier for pensioners to access 
essential documents. Over 30 Urban Local Bodies 
from different Municipal Corporations of State/UT 
have been integrated to bring ease of governance.
• 
36 State Boards providing X and XII marksheets; 14 
Technical Boards; and 3 Central Boards including 
CBSE, CISCE, and NIOS have been integrated 
with DigiLocker.
• 
2,700 Higher Educational Bodies registered with 
DigiLocker, the sole National Academic Depository 
(NAD), with over 84 crore certificates/mark sheets 
available.
• 
DigiLocker is being implemented in Academic 
Bank of Credits (ABC) ID and now the APAAR ID, 
aligning with the “One Nation, One Student ID” 
initiative under NEP, 2020.
• 
Other recent key achievements include Railway 
Recruitment Board for recruitment processes; 
CKYC: Centralized database of KYC; Fisherman 

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
25
Card; RGI 2.0; Indian Airforce for AgniVeer Vayu 
Recruitment; Soil Health Cards and Crop Insurance 
Policies by Ministry of Agriculture, LinkedIn 
allowing for document sharing and verification; 
Yes Bank and Edelweiss Mutual Fund receipts for 
diversifying the financial sector.
Entity Locker, an integral initiative of DigiLocker, designed 
to empower organizations by providing a secure, cloud-
based platform for storing, sharing, and verifying digital 
documents and certificates has been developed and 
being implemented. 
Projections for January – March 2025:
•	
More than 43.40 Crore registered users with over 
939 Crore Issued Documents.
•	
Issues documents are projected to increase by 6.5 
Crore by March, 2025
•	
Over 1800 Registered issuers and around 2200 
Crore issuers
2.3.5	 Electronic 
Transaction 
Aggregation 
and 
Analysis Layer 3.0 (eTaal 3.0)
As part of the Government of India’s efforts to promote 
transparency, 
security 
and 
accountability 
across 
all aspects of governance, many Central and State 
Government Ministries, Departments and Organizations 
(MDOs) have adopted a digital-first approach by 
facilitating and recording eTransactions to enhance 
service delivery. 
The eTaal portal (https://etaal.gov.in) was developed to 
provide a near real-time view of eServices, aggregating 
eTransaction counts from integrated applications via 
web API technology. Launched in April 2022, eTaal 3.0 
aims to measure qualitative aspects of eService delivery, 
enabling performance comparisons across Central 
Ministries, States, Union Territories, and Smart Cities, 
down to the district level. It also incorporates AI-enabled 
chatbots, predictive analysis, and Business Intelligence 
(BI) dashboards for generating meaningful insights.
Achievements
• 
4,381 eServices have been integrated since the 
launch of the eTaal portal.
• 
1,623 eServices integrated with granularity up to 
district level.
• 
As total of 1,05,271 cr eTransactions have been 
recorded.
• 
Currently, a total of 93.33 cr eTransactions are 
being recorded on a daily basis.
• 
Users can access 15+ types of analytical reports 
on the eTaal 3.0 website.
• 
Qualified eServices on a 9-parameter Key 
Performing Indicator (KPI) framework. Each 
eService is evaluated and scored on parameters 
such as Use of Digital Signatures, ePayment 
integration, Implementation of Mobile Application, 
Local Language Interface, Application Security 
Audit, Accessibility etc. 
*
*Records as of December 2024

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
26
Benefits
The eTaal portal provides several key benefits for 
enhancing e-Governance services:
• 
Near Real-time Monitoring: Offers near real-time 
tracking of eTransactions, ensuring up-to-date 
data on service delivery.
• 
eService Transaction Benchmarking: Allows for 
qualitative and quantitative eService Transaction 
comparisons across Central Ministries, States and 
Union Territories.
• 
Transparency and Accountability: Aggregates data 
from multiple applications, promoting transparency 
in government services and consolidation of data 
in one single platform.
• 
Advanced Analytics: Features include AI-enabled 
chatbot, 
predictive 
analytics, 
and 
Business 
Intelligence 
(BI) 
dashboards 
for 
generating 
actionable insights.
• 
Comprehensive Reporting: Provides a unified view 
of all eServices and a variety of reports such as 
timeline analysis, transactions per 1000 population, 
State services reporting and more.
2.3.6	 Vikaspedia 2.0
Vikaspedia an initiative by MeitY, aims to develop an 
AI augmented digital ecosystem that promotes the 
availability of e-information in regional languages to 
empower citizens and drive digital transformation. Its 
objective is to enhance the impact of ongoing government 
programmes by providing universally accessible digital 
information resources in Indian Languages. These 
resources are created and shared collaboratively by a 
dynamic, multi-stakeholder digital ecosystem, supported 
by technological advancements, capacity-building, and 
knowledge enablers.
The revamped technology framework of Vikaspedia 
(www.vikaspedia.in) has been rolled out. The framework 
is enabled with AI features such as Machine Assisted 
Translation (supporting 20 Indian languages), Automatic 
Speech Recognition (supporting 10 Indian languages), 
Vikaspedia AI that provides the facility to summarise 
content and assist content drafting, Optical Character 
Recognition, multilingual and voice enabled chatbot, 
context aware search, knowledge graphs, etc. 
The vibrant community of Vikaspedia includes 2 lakh+ 
collaborators (individuals and institutions) offering about 
seven lakh knowledge resource covering key livelihood 
sectors such as agriculture and allied sectors, health 
and nutrition, energy and environment, education, social 
welfare, eGovernance, etc. 5 Master Trainers workshops 
were organized during the period. The portal records 
about 3 million hits.
2.3.7	 Implementation of National Data Highway 
(NDH)/ API Setu
MeitY in 2015 had notified the ‘Policy on Open Application 
Programming Interfaces (APIs)’. The policy intended to 
promote efficient sharing of data among data owners 
and inter-and-intra Governmental agencies to achieve 
the objective of interoperable systems in order to deliver 
services in an integrated manner. The key objective of 
this project is to facilitate implementation of Open API 
Policy and build open and interoperable digital platform 
to enable seamless service delivery across government. 
Under the project, a platform namely, ‘API Setu’ has 
been developed.
Achievements
• 
Number of published APIs: 6000+
• 
Number of publishers: 1700+
• 
Number of Consumers: 634+
• 
More than 312.01 crore transactions
• 
Key publishers: PAN, Driving License, Registration 
of Vehicles, COVID Vaccination Certificate, CBSE 
etc.
• 
Key consumers: eSanad, NABARD, Centre for 
e-Governance, Karnataka, Department of Higher 
Education, Haryana etc.
Notable use cases of the platform
• 
Paperless admission process such as University 
of Delhi uses API Setu to check the academic 
credentials of CBSE students applying to the 
University on real time basis.
• 
Karnataka State Police utilizes API Setu to check 
candidates’ class X and XII marks while applying 
for a job. With this step, the overall recruitment 
period has been cut in half.

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
27
• 
e-Sanad is an application of Ministry of External 
Affairs used to verify the educational qualifications 
of students asking for admission to overseas 
universities. e-Sanad now has access to over 18 
school boards via a single application. API Setu 
has removed the need for duplicate integrations 
with each board, saving a significant amount of 
money and effort.
Projections for January – March 2025 of API Setu
•	
Number of published APIs: 500
•	
Number of Consumers: 15
•	
More than 50 crore transactions.
2.3.8	 Pragati VC 2.0
PRAGATI is a distinctive and interactive platform through 
which Hon’ble Prime Minister monitors the implementation 
of various government schemes, addresses grievances 
and monitors state and central projects and programs, 
by facilitating direct interacting with all stakeholders, 
including Secretaries to Government of India and 
Chief Secretaries of States, via videoconferencing on 
a unified platform. PRAGATI has effectively enhanced 
communication, significantly reducing inter-departmental 
gaps and expediting the implementation of projects and 
schemes. PRAGATI 2.0 was approved with an outlay of 
Rs. 47.09 cr for the 5 years. 
Using the PRAGATI video conferencing infrastructure, 
Government of India has reviewed 348 (Central/
States) Projects worth around Rs 17.36 Lakhs crores, 
59 
programmers/Schemes 
of 
various 
Ministries/
Departments and 18 Sector Grievances. Hon’ble Prime 
Minister has chaired 44 PRAGATI videoconferencing 
sessions till date.
In addition to defined objectives, Hon’ble Prime Minister 
also used the PRAGATI videoconferencing infrastructure 
for various Inaugurations, Flagging off, Melas, Launches 
and international conferences. Hon’ble Prime Minister 
also used the PRAGATI videoconferencing infrastructure 
for various international events, including the Voice of 
Global South Summit (VoGSS) and the G20 Programme, 
launches of projects under bilateral agreements with 
many countries. NIC also participated in the G20 program, 
connecting over 20 Countries and Organizations through 
video conferencing.
2.3.9	 myScheme
To meet Universal Transparent Tracking of Applications 
and Responses to Applications (UTTARA) project’s 
objective of developing an online platform for schemes 
search and discovery, myScheme - a product for 
advanced and personalised search for eligible schemes 
was launched by Hon’ble PM on 4th July, 2022 during 
Digital India Week-2022 in Gandhinagar. The platform 
helps the citizens to find the right Government schemes 
for them. It also guides on how to apply for different 
Government schemes. The portal may be accessed at 
https://www.myscheme.gov.in/ and mobile App may be 
downloaded from https://play.google.com/store/apps/
details?id=in.gov.negd.myscheme.
Features available for Beneficiaries:
• 
User Sign-in & Sign-up via MeriPehchaan, 
DigiLocker. 
• 
Personalized Search allows users to Search and 
Discover schemes using their demographic details. 
• 
Check Eligibility Questionnaire allows users to 
check their eligibility for a particular scheme by 
answering a set of simple Yes/No type scheme-
specific questions.
• 
Easily apply for multiple schemes and fetch verified 
documents from DigiLocker.
• 
Transparent tracking of applied applications 
through the profile section.
• 
Bookmark favourite schemes for quick access to 
apply later.
• 
Save profiles of self or relatives which will ease the 
search process.
• 
Stay in the know with real-time updates.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
28
• 
Get Central ministry-wise and State government-
wise scheme count. 
• 
Real-time Notifications service to send real-time 
updates via email and in-app notifications. 
Features available for Government Officials
• 
GovForms allows departments to create forms 
using DigiLocker integrated application to minimize 
the need for manual & repetitive verification of 
documents. 
• 
User management – role-based permissions/rights 
to the officials of the respective departments may 
be granted.
• 
Application/response 
management- 
Officials 
can manage scheme-wise application forms and 
assign officials to receive them.
• 
Provision to add scheme-wise news and updates.
• 
User Sign-in & Sign-up via MeriPehchaan. 
• 
Authorities can modify the status of received 
applications, thereby improving the transparent 
tracking of these applications.
• 
Real-time Notifications service to send real-time 
updates via email and in-app notifications.
Achievements: So far, there are a total of 2,646 schemes 
published, out of which Central government schemes are 
522 whereas State/UT government schemes are 2,124. 
There are approximately 2,300+ schemes of which 
the Check Eligibility Questionnaire is updated on the 
myScheme platform.
2.3.10 eGOVMMCASES 
Development of Multimedia Cases with teaching notes 
on e-Governance Initiatives of Government of India:
Case-based learning is an established approach used 
across disciplines where students apply their knowledge 
to real-world scenarios, promoting higher levels of 
cognition. Accordingly, this project has been initiated 
wherein the key is to develop 20 multimedia cases on 
different e-governance initiatives of Government of India 
by providing a comprehensive summary of the project’s 
background and its current status & make it available on 
a web-based platform. Out of these 20 cases, at least 8 
cases would be targeted to publish at Harvard Business 
Publishing. 
• 
Drafting and Peer review of all 21 cases completed.
• 
Six cases (Passport Seva, GeM, eSign, eNAM, 
BHIM, and API Setu) have been submitted to 
HBSP for review. Based on the review, the next 
set of cases is to be submitted.
• 
Four cases, along with teaching notes (Digital 
India, Parivahan, Jeevan Pramaan, and Income 
Tax Portal), were presented at the XIX International 
Conference on Public Policy & Management at IIM 
Bangalore on 27 to 29 August 2024. 
• 
The Aadhaar case was presented at the Higher 
Education Planning in Asia Forum 2024, hosted by 
the University of Auckland on April 10th and 11th, 
2024. It was part of discussions on the strategic 
integration of Aadhaar, DigiLocker, and ABC.
2.3.11 To set-up India Enterprise Architecture (IndEA) 
at NeGD
In order to facilitate better governance to citizens and 
enable whole-of-government approach, policy integration 
and use of big data analytics is required. These trends 
require breaking of sectoral barriers and silos and re-
architecting the Government as a single enterprise. 
Keeping in view the above facts, MeitY formulated India 
Enterprise Architecture (IndEA) Framework along with 
its Adoption Guide. The vision of IndEA is “to establish 
best-in-class architectural governance, processes and 
practices with optimal utilization of ICT infrastructure and 
applications to offer ONE Government experience to the 
citizens and businesses”. 
For pilot implementation of IndEA, a project titled ‘To 
set-up India Enterprise Architecture (IndEA) Division 
at NeGD’ was initiated with the target to support two 
central Ministries/ Departments and 2 States/UTs have 
been targeted. Major objective of the project is to raise 
maturity of existing e-Services to Level IV i.e. Connected 
Services (reference to United Nations e-Service Maturity 
Model), simplify processes, enhance enterprise security, 
make use of latest technology, facilitate information-
based decision making while driving efficiency, cost 
benefits, sharing and reuse. Role of MeitY is to provide 
technical and advisory support and concerned Ministry/
State would be the owner of their respective platform.

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
29
Some of the major achievements are as follows:
1.	
Meghalaya Enterprise Architecture (MeghEA)– 
Based on IndEA the blueprinting exercise for 
the State of Meghalaya was done. 4 State level 
sensitization workshop and 36 district level 
sensitization workshops and Finance Solution 
Architecture trainings have been completed. 
Meghalya State unit launched Phase I of the 
Solution Architecture Blueprint for the Finance 
Department. 
E-Proposal 
System 
(Managing 
all schemes and planning– Admin Approval, 
Sanction, etc). The  Meghalaya  government  key 
initiative of e-proposal system, part of Meghalaya 
Enterprise  Architect  has won a coveted  UN 
Award- 
World 
Summit 
on 
the 
Information 
Society  Forum  (WSIS) prize  at Geneva in 
Switzerland. 
2.	
State of Jharkhand has worked out InDEA based 
architecture for Universities (UEAF). 
3.	
14 State level workshops and one regional 
workshop especially designed for all North Eastern 
States have been organised.
4.	
Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM)– 
MeitY/NeGD provided technical support to Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare in the preparation of 
National Digital Health Blueprint and in onboarding 
of PMU team. It has enrolled 67+ Crore beneficiaries 
through ABHA and 43 crore ABHA linked electronic 
health records have been created. 
5.	
National 
Digital 
Education 
Architecture 
(NDEAR) for DoSEL and DoHE – NDEAR 
blueprint document has been prepared by Ministry 
of Education with the support from NeGD, MeitY 
and it has been launched by the Hon’ble PM. It has 
resulted in creation of lifelong student ID called 
APAAR. 34 crore APAAR ID has been registered.
6.	
AgriStack and India Digital Ecosystem for 
Agriculture (IDEA) – The blueprint document on 
IDEA has been prepared with support from NeGD, 
MeitY and it has been launched by the Union 
Minister of Agriculture. It has resulted into the 
design and development of AgriStack, which is in 
rollout stage. 
7.	
National Urban Digital Mission – The National 
Urban Innovation Stack has been prepared & 
resultant mission with key building blocks (IUDX, 
CGHS) has been launched. Feedback regarding 
standards is being provided.
8.	
National Digital Tourism Mission – The support 
to formulation of National Tourism Policy based 
on IndEA was provided and also, RFP support for 
PMU was provided. 
9.	
Poshan Tracker for M/o Women and Child 
Development has been designed and rolled out. It 
has been integrated with applications of M/o Health 
and Family Welfare.
2.3.12	 OGD 2.0 (Open Government Data 2.0: Micro 
Service Based Architecture Leveraging Cloud 
Technology)
MeitY under the aegis of National Data Sharing and 
Accessibility Policy (NDSAP) initiated Open Government 
Data (OGD) Platform India, to share government data 
with its citizens. The Platform has been set-up and 
managed by the National Informatics Centre (NIC).
OGD 2.0 - Micro Services Based Architecture Leveraging 
Cloud Technology has been initiated from May 2020. The 
Platform provides Government to Government (G2G) 
service by allowing Ministries/Departments/ States/
Organizations to publish and manage their datasets on 
the Platform through a Chief Data Officer (CDO). The 
datasets are available to all free of cost. 
As of 9th October, 2024 OGD India has 5,03,726 dataset/
resources, 12,734 catalogs, 3,260 Visualizations created, 
and 2,46,077 Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) 
created. OGD India has 35.93 million times viewed and 
10.41 million times datasets have been downloaded 
(as shown in fig.) All these datasets are updated with 
their respective granularity. Some of them are being 
updated multiple times during a day (real-time) e.g., 
Real time Air Quality Index (AQI), eShram, PINCODE, 
Rainfall, Patent, Kisan Call Center, Current Daily Price of 
Various Commodities from Various Markets (Mandi), etc. 
Many training sessions were organized for CDOs/Data 
Contributors.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
30
Launched DARPG and GSTN Hackathon on https://event.
data.gov.in platform: The purpose of the hackathons is to 
engage Indian students, researchers, and innovators in 
developing advanced, data-driven AI and ML solutions 
based on given dataset. 
Organized Stakeholders’ meet for Government Data 
Ecosystem: The event brought together a diverse 
spectrum of stakeholders, including government officials, 
data scientists, researchers, policymakers, industry 
experts, journalists, and civil society representatives, 
to foster collaboration within the open government 
data ecosystem. The workshop is aimed to facilitate a 
comprehensive exchange of perspectives, challenges, 
and opportunities related to open data.
2.3.13 e-Governance Standards and Guidelines 
MeitY had set-up an institutional mechanism under 
Digital India to evolve/adopt standards in e-Governance 
under the project titled ‘e-Governance Standards and 
Guidelines’. Key objective of this project is to develop/
adopt ICT standards/guidelines/frameworks for effective 
and efficient implementation of e-Governance projects. 
This will ensure sharing of information and seamless 
interoperability of data across e-Governance applications
C-DAC, Pune and Standardisation Testing and Quality 
Certification (STQC) Directorate have been entrusted 
to develop/review ICT standards, guidelines and/
or frameworks for e-Governance projects along with 
proliferation of MeitY notified standards and guidelines 
so far.
Achievements
• 
3rd brainstorming session was conducted to finalize 
the topics for formulation of standards, guidelines 
or frameworks under the chairmanship of, Joint 
Secretary, MeitY on June 12, 2024 where following 
topics were finalised:
	
o	
Governance, Risk & Compliance Manage-
ment
	
o	
Enterprise Risk Management
	
o	
Microservices 
	
o	
Sandbox Testing 
	
o	
Two Factor or Multi Factor Authentication
*Records as of September 2024

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
31
	
o	
Digital Preservation guidelines (revision) 
and 
	
o	
Interoperability Framework for e-Govern-
ance (revision)
• 
Various Working Groups were constituted during 
the period for the formulation of guidelines. The draft 
guidelines documents on 2nd year topics namely 
Cloud Interoperability & Portability, Enterprise 
Architecture Security and MDDS-Education were 
reviewed by the Closed Group and submitted for 
further process, while the guidelines documents on 
Mobile Security, Zero Trust Architecture and IoT 
Security were revised during the period.
• 
05 (two days) physical– State level Awareness 
workshops were conducted to facilitate the 
proliferation, understanding and awareness of 
MeitY notified standards, guidelines, frameworks 
and technologies. 
Projections for January – March 2025:
• 
Two draft documents namely (i) MDDS-Agriculture 
and (ii) OLES shall be submitted to MeitY for further 
process.
• 
A total of 03 (three) physical State-Level Awareness 
Workshop & CBT on e-Governance Standards & 
Guidelines shall be conducted.
2.3.14 Unified Mobile Application for New-Age 
Governance (UMANG)
Launched by Hon’ble Prime Minister on 23rd November 
2017, UMANG has been conceptualized by the 
Government of India with an objective to improve ease-
of-living by putting the power in the hands of citizens for 
availing major government services anytime, anywhere 
with just few clicks on a single unified 
mobile application integrated with 
DigiLocker, myScheme, NSSO, etc. It 
enables the citizens of India to access 
e-Government services of various 
sectors 
such 
as 
Agriculture, 
Education, 
Health, 
Housing, 
Employees, Pensioners, Students, 
Ration Card, Railways, and many 
more services from the Central and 
State Governments.
Achievements
• 
UMANG is available in 23 multi-lingual languages 
(for top 100 services), including English & Hindi 
and has been hosted on cloud. UMANG aims to 
bring power to the fingertips of citizens.
•	
Till 31st December 2024, UMANG has about 2101 
– Central and State Govt. services (including 864 
DBT services) from 207 departments of Central 
and State Government of 32 States/UTs and many 
more are continuously being on-boarded. It is pro-
jected to increase by 40 services by March, 2025.
• 
Over 7.34 Crore users are registered and benefiting 
from services on UMANG.
•	
Revamp of UMANG Android and iOS app was 
launched with a new UI/UX providing more 
personalized and secure experience. UMANG 
has been successfully integrated with DigiLocker 
and now the users of DigiLocker can seamlessly 
access the services of UMANG.
•	
UMANG app is now more secure with biometric 
(fingerprint) authentication. Voice-based search 
was implemented to enhance the user experience.
•	
OTP based login in EPFO service has been 
removed to make seamless login for the user 
which will also reduce cost for the project. Now 
users having same registered mobile number in 
UMANG and EPFO can login directly.
•	
UMANG app services are also made available in 
assisted mode through Common Service Centres 
(CSCs) and 15 private partners to extend the reach 
to the users.
2.3.15	 A Virtual Reality-Based Assistive System 
for Learning and Assessment of Persons with 
Intellectual Disabilities
This project is to integrate various curricula across the 
country in the area of intellectual disability to identify the 
list of the subjects, concepts, and topics to be taught at the 
various degrees of severity for the holistic development 
of persons with intellectual disabilities. Under the project, 
a web/mobile based system and content/topics will be 
developed along with trainings at different levels across 
India.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
32
Objectives:
i.	
To identify the list of the subjects, concepts, and 
topics to be taught for the holistic development of 
persons with intellectual disabilities.
ii.	
To develop a comprehensive framework that 
makes the assessment, learning, and evaluation 
processes more accessible and effective.
iii.	
To design and produce inclusive content that 
caters to different age groups of individuals with 
intellectual disabilities,
iv.	
To conduct pilot studies and to expand system 
deployment across the Indian landscape.
Achievements:
• 
Topic/Sub-Topics Identification and Validation: 
200 Topics have been identified and validated and 
are now ready for scripting and video production. 
Around 200 topics have been identified and 
validated under the ‘Activities of Daily Living’ and 
the ‘Domestic’ domains. 
• 
No. of Videos prepared: 20 High-quality videos 
have been prepared, following the appropriate 
teaching strategy for each ID person. Each video 
is 10-17 minutes long. The topics for the videos 
include brushing teeth, washing and wiping hands, 
wearing clothes, 
• 
No. of AR/VR content: 10 Self-help AR/VR content 
has been created. AR content can be played on 
mobile phones, tablets, laptops, and PCs, while 
VR content is compatible with VR headsets. AR 
simulations for topics such as purchasing goods, 
setting the dining table, etc., have been made. VR 
content has been developed for topics such as 
identifying animals in the jungle, traffic lights, and 
finding the washroom. 3D games such as Dressing 
Adventure have been developed. 
• 
No. of Schools visited: 50 special schools have 
been visited for their registration and to gather 
feedback on the content being developed. States 
such as Uttarakhand, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal 
Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Nadu have been 
visited for collaboration with schools. 
• 
Number of workshops/brainstorming sessions/
meetings: 44 Workshops with various stakeholders, 
such as special educators and experts, have 
been conducted to brainstorm ideas for content 
development and ideation of the portal. The project 
idea was presented at a National Parents meeting 
at NIEPID, at which many parents appreciated the 
initiative and were ready to support the cause. 
• 
As a result of these workshops and ideation 
sessions, a QA process has been formulated 
and validated for content development, which 
begins at Topic Selection and proceeds till media 
development; the Media Experts finally sign off the 
developed content.
Projections for January – March 2025:
• 
Number of 2D Animation-Based Videos (each 
covering 25 topics/sub-topics) will be 50; 
• 
the number of AR/VR-Based Content (each 
covering 25 topics/sub-topics)will be 10 and lastly 
the Sensor-Based Games (each covering 25 
topics/sub-topics)will be 4
2.3.16	 iMedDesk - AI Assisted Medical Services 
Framework by C-DAC Noida
In order to make healthcare services accessible to the 
masses, it is essential to provide easy-to-use interfaces to 
end users (doctors and patients) to be able to effortlessly 
use the system. iMedDesk - AI Assisted Healthcare 
Services Framework aims to develop a mechanism for 
helping patients seeking information regarding medical 
or healthcare services at hospitals and aiding doctors 
to enable them to cater a greater volume of patients in 
healthcare.
Achievements 
• 
Core modules of the system like Natural 
Language Understanding, Query Parsing, SQL 
query generation and Query execution has been 
successfully completed and tested.
• 
Speech recognition, Speech synthesis for English 
and Hindi languages and bi-directional machine 
translation services for English to Hindi have been 
customized and fine-tuned.

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
33
• 
Patient enquiries Chabot is integrated in AIIMS 
Gorakhpur App for both English and Hindi 
languages. Real patient queries are being collected 
and logged, with continuous monitoring in place to 
evolve the system further. App can be downloaded 
from Google Play store.
• 
iMedDesk as service has been built for Sarvodaya 
Hospital and is in testing phase.
• 
Design and development of Doctor Desk which 
includes 
investigation, 
encounter, 
diagnosis 
and medication module have been completed. 
Latest Gen-AI is being experimented for answer 
generation.
• 
Development of a voice-based IPD discharge 
summary preparation system is currently in 
progress, 
featuring 
dictation 
capabilities 
for 
creating summaries. It also includes speech 
synthesis for reviewing the summaries, highlighting 
of SNOMED-CT terms for standardization, and 
expanding medical acronyms to provide more 
descriptive content.
2.3.17	 CollabFiles (https://collabfiles.nic.in)
The objective of the project was to provide a centralized 
platform for Government officials and employees to 
create and manage office documentation such as 
documents, spreadsheets etc. and to facilitate portability 
of documents in standard formats such as xml, txt, docx, 
xlsx, odt etc, Logs for sharing of documents.
Approved on : 30th December, 2022 for 3 years
Outlay: Rs. 11.687 Cr 
Achievements:
As on December 2024, there are 31,000+ users, working 
on 43,000+ files. 120+ Department including major 
ministries / departments are Department of Telecom, 
Census of India, Railway Board, Director General 
Defence Estates, Enforcement Directorate, Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Delhi Metro Rail Corporation, National 
Institute of Rural Development, Directorate of Mines & 
Geology, Govt of Telangana, Central Power Research 
Institute, NIC etc are using the project.
2.3.18	 GovDrive – Storage as a Service (https://
drive.gov.in)
The objective of the project was to provide Storage as 
a Service for the Government of India via cloud-based 
multi-tenant platform to Government officials for sharing 
documents. The project aims to deploy a service that 
includes user agents for all devices and will enable 
Government officials to store, share, access, delete and 
/or modify the documents /files /folders online. 
Approved on : 6th January, 2023 for 3 years
Outlay: Rs. 55.91 Cr 
Achievements:
As on December 2024, the platform is running to store 
documents and/or folders securely for current user 
base of 10 lakhs catering functionalities like uploading/
downloading 
single 
and 
multiple 
files/directories. 
creating/sharing/moving/copying/replacing 
folder/
directory, deleting/restoring files/folders, external platform 
integration with CollabFiles and ZoHo, edit/rename file/
folder, mark file/folder as favorite, comprehensive search 
of files/folders/emails and mail preview.
2.3.19	 Kisan Sarathi 2.0: Enhancement, Operations 
Maintenance and Support
The objective of the project is to provide multi lingual 
support to farmers in seeking the advisories in the domains 
of agriculture, horticulture, fishery and animal husbandry 
directly from the Agricultural Scientists. Kisan Sarathi 2.0 
an integrated national ICT platform will be built to cater 
agriculture extension related activities and services. The 
platform would also provide seamless, multi-channel 
(audio-video consultation, App, IVR, Chatbot, Web Portal, 
Whatsapp, email, etc.) support to farmers to connect with 
the knowledge base & pool of large number of the subject 
matter experts spread across all 740+ KVKs/DAATTC 
and 100+ ICAR institutions in all the States and UTs. 
Development/Customization of multi-lingual, multi-media 
ICT platform for supporting multi-ways communications 
among farmers, researchers, extension personnel etc. 
Development of Agriculture Advisory Management 
System (AAMS) to support the Agricultural Experts and 
ultimately farmers and integration with Kisan Sarathi 2.0. 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
34
Establishment of a framework for seem less operation 
and maintenance
Approved on: 22nd Feb, 2024 for 3 years 
Outlay: Rs 29.76 Crore (MeitY contribution to DIC- Rs. 
9.92 crore and ICAR contribution- Rs. 19.84 crore)
Achievements:
•	
Developed Farmer Mobile App (through UMANG), 
and pilot testing is in progress.
•	
2.48+ Crore Farmer registered onto Kisan Sarathi 
Portal
•	
740+ KVKs and DAATTC on boarded onto Kisan 
Sarathi Portal
•	
3054+ Experts registered.
2.3.20	 Design 
and 
Development 
of 
School 
Management System, office ERP and Integrated 
Content Management Portal for Eklavya Model 
Residential Schools under the National Education 
Society for Tribal Students (NESTS)
Eklavya Schools setup by National Education Society for 
Tribal Students (NESTS) are model residential schools 
that are spread all over the country with the aim to provide 
quality modern education to the talented tribal children. 
This project envisages to computerise/automate its 
manual system of processes. The main objectives are 
as follows:
(I)	
Development and Implementation of following for 
the 405 operational Eklavya Schools, 28 state 
societies and 1 Head Quarter.
	
(a)	
School Management System,
	
(b)	
Hostel & Mess Management System,
 
(c) 
Office ERP, Payroll, and
	
(d)	
Integrated Content Management Portal
(II)	
Development of Mobile App
(III)	
Roll-out of the developed system in the schools 
and its support & maintenance.
This is new project to be implemented jointly by CDAC, 
Noida & NESTS approved on 22.10.2024 with a total 
budget outlay of Rs. 1,156.63 lakh for a duration of 36 
months.
2.3.21	 Gov.in Secure Intranet Portal
A state of the art platform ‘Gov.in Secure Intranet’ has 
been developed by National Informatics Centre (NIC) 
under the guidance of Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY) to streamline the day 
to day operations of Government officials. This platform 
offers a unified Single Sign On (SSO) through Parichay, 
providing access to various Government-to-Employee 
(G2E) applications such as eMail, eOffice, Sparrow, 
Prayas and others.
The platform, designed with advanced UI/UX principles 
inspired by global best practices, facilitates efficient 
Calendar Management, Task Tracking, Goal Tracking 
and more, accessible through both desktop or mobile 
application. Its meeting scheduling tools, integrated with 
platforms such as Swagatam and BharatVC automate 
visitor pass issuance and offer virtual meeting options, 
significantly enhancing productivity.
Executive Dashboard provides bird eye view to senior 
officers about the status of grievances, court cases, 
VIP references, Media coverage, RTI Application etc. 
pertaining to respective Ministry.
*Records as of September 2024
API Integrations
*Integration in Process

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
35
2.3.22	 Prayas 2.0
1.	
PRAYAS– “Dashboard of Dashboards” (https://
prayas.nic.in) pursuing excellence in governance 
has been developed under the direction of the 
PMO with collaborative efforts of Data Analytics 
Informatics Division, NIC and Centre of Excellence 
for Data Analytics (CEDA), NICSI to present a 
comprehensive and consolidated view of schemes 
of various Ministries/Departments in one single 
platform for improved monitoring and decision-
making. 
2.	
This platform offers interactive visualizations, 
robust analytics, and actionable insights to support 
data-driven 
governance, 
ensuring 
alignment 
between policymaking and program implementation. 
Prayas integrates data electronically via APIs 
directly from the MIS/IT systems of the concerned 
Ministries and Departments. The platform was 
demonstrated to the Hon’ble Prime Minister on 
September 4, 2020, and subsequently to all Union 
Cabinet Ministers and Ministers of State during 
October-November 2021. 
Key Features – 
i. 
Unified platform with a comprehensive view of 
schemes across Ministries and sectors
ii.	
Create and save custom reports by selecting 
specific parameters and saving them as favorites
iii.	
API integration for electronic data collection from 
Ministry/Department MIS systems
iv.	
Integration of DGQI scores for schemes by NITI 
Aayog.
v.	
Role based Access to schemes and KPIs for 
Hon’ble Ministers and Secretary-level officers.
Key Achievements – 
Sectors
Ministries/Departments
Schemes
KPIs
Visualizations
7
61
186
1244
3000+
2.4	
Digital Empowerment
2.4.1	 Collaboration 
Application 
Development 
Platform by opening the Source Code of Government 
Applications (Open Forge)
OpenForge (https://openforge.gov.in) is a collaboration 
platform similar to Github that provides industry 
standard tools and features for version control, release 
management, 
code 
repository, 
requirements/bugs 
trackers and document repository. It is the Government 
of India’s platform for the open collaborative development 
of e-Governance applications. This platform provides 
strategic control to government departments over their 
software source code. In 2015, MeitY rolled out the 
“Policy on Collaborative Application Development by 
Opening the source code of Government Applications” 
which provides a framework for archiving government 
custom-developed source code in repositories and 
opening these repositories for promoting reuse, sharing 
and remixing.
Project Objectives:
• 
Provide a platform for maintaining code repositories 
and version control for government source code.
• 
Promote a culture of open collaborative application 
development between public agencies and private 
organizations, citizens and institutions.
• 
Reduce development cycles and fasten the rollout 
of e-governance applications in the country.
• 
Deliver e-governance services and solutions of 
higher quality and security through increased 
transparency and mass peer review.
• 
Reduce e-governance project cost and bring down 
total cost of ownership through a system of reuse, 
remixing and sharing.
Achievements:
• 
Currently, OpenForge has 14,164 registered users. 
• 
So far, 3,083 projects have been onboarded.
• 
Till now 8,35,851 GIT push has been made. 
• 
Many projects of national importance such 
as CoWIN, Poshan Tracker, GeM, UMANG, 
DigiLocker, Smart City, API Setu, iGOT Karamyogi, 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
36
Ayushman Bharat CPHC-NCD, etc are on this 
platform for day-to-day development activities.
• 
410 NIC users are onboarded on OpenForge 
platform and a total of 200+ NIC projects registered.
• 
Source code of some projects such as Smart City, 
Digilocker issuer App, Aarogya Setu etc made 
public
2.4.2	 National Knowledge Network (NKN)
NKN is an innovative, cutting-edge, robust, and secured 
network, which provides a centralized multi-gigabit 
high-speed digital connectivity backbone for research & 
educational institutions and Government Organisations 
spread across India.
NKN was approved in March 2010 by Cabinet Committee 
of Infrastructure (CCI) to be implemented by National 
Informatics Centre (NIC) over a period of 10 years 
at a total outlay of Rs. 5,990 Crore, which has been 
enhanced to Rs. 6956.88 Crore. Subsequently, duration 
of NKN has been extended year-on-year with the current 
extension being till 31st March 2025. The approval for the 
next phase of NKN [i.e. National Knowledge Network 
Phase II] is under process. NKN has been playing a vital 
role in enhancing digital capabilities and implementing 
the digital initiatives of the Government of India. NKN 
addressed the challenging task of providing a robust, 
and secured network which enabled the government 
to implement Government to Government (G2G) and 
Government to Citizen (G2C) services seamlessly and in 
time bound manner for implementing the services.
NKN is the only network globally, that carries R&E, 
Internet, and e-Governance traffic as three independent 
verticals under one umbrella.
NKN Status: National Reach (as on December 2024)
 
Under NKN, 1,808 links have been extended to 
institutions, comprising almost all the major IITs, 
Central Universities, State Universities, NITs, IIITs, 
IIMs, hospitals in tertiary care such as AIIMS, PGIs, 
State Government hospitals, national laboratories 
under DAE & DST, DRDO, MHRD, ICAR, ICMR 
and a host of other government institutions / 
departments. 
 
The outreach includes 639 district links under NKN 
covering 534 districts across India
 
Today NKN has 31 Points of Presence (PoPs) in 
various State Capitals (including 7 Super Core 
PoPs).
 
The network strength of NKN comprises of high 
speed (10G) core backbone with uniformly spread 
96 core links across the country comprising of 88 
core links with 10G bandwidth, 7 core links with 
2.5G bandwidth and 1 core link with 1G bandwidth. 
 
In its progressive outreach, NKN has provided 10G 
bandwidth to 81 Edge links covering 61 Institutes, 
1G bandwidth to 1,007 Edge links covering 982 
Institutes and 100M bandwidth to 751 Edge links 
covering 750 Institutes.
 
The network has a peak traffic flow of 23 Petabytes 
and average traffic flow of 1.9 Tera Bytes in a day.
NKN Status: International Reach
 
NKN has been significantly expanding its global 
reach by establishing 3 International PoPs at 
Singapore, Amsterdam, and Geneva (CERN).
 
For increasing its Global outreach, NKN has peered 
with other National Research and Education 
Networks (NRENs) such as Asi@connect in Asia 
Pacific, CERN and GEANT in Europe, SingAREN 
in Singapore, Internet2 in USA, LEARN in Sri 
Lanka, BdREN in Bangladesh, DrukREN in Bhutan 
and NORDUnet for Nordic countries.
 
NKN has established direct links with Singapore 
(1×10 
Gbps), 
Netherlands-Amsterdam 
(2×10 
Gbps), 
Switzerland-Geneva 
(2×10 
Gbps), 
Bangladesh (1×1 Gbps), Bhutan (1×5 Gbps), Sri 
Lanka (1×1 Gbps) and Maldives (1×1 Gbps).
 
As per the vision of Hon’ble Prime Minister of 
India, to bolster sub-regional collaboration among 
SAARC and BIMSTEC countries, NKN has already 
expanded its connectivity to Bangladesh, Bhutan, 
Sri Lanka, and Maldives. 

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
37
2.4.3	 Integrated 
Citizen 
Engagement 
Platform 
(INCEP)/MyGov
MyGov is a Government of India’s Citizen Engagement 
Platform which collaborates with multiple Government 
bodies/ Ministries to engage people in policy formulation 
and seeks the opinion of people on issues/ topics of 
public interest and welfare. 
Approved on : 1st July, 2021 for 5 years i.e. till 30th June 
2026 
Outlay: Rs. 245.7 Cr
Achievements: 
Since inception in 2014, MyGov has engaged 4.85 cr.+ 
citizens in participative governance as MyGov Sathis 
and from July 2021, InCEP came into force and till 31 
December 2024 it has achieved over 2.48+ Crore user 
registration, currently average growth of 40,000 registra-
tion per day, 589 tasks with over 6.14 lakhs submissions, 
129 discussions hosted with 7.27 lakh submissions, 909 
quizzes having 206.55 Lakh participations, 43 polls and 
surveys receiving 181.2 lakh votes and 101 innovate ac-
tivities with 151.58 lakh submissions.
2.4.4	 Digital India Common Services Centre
Setting-up of 4,740 CSCs, with enhanced scope and 
facilities, at the Gram Panchayat / Village level, has been 
envisaged under the subject project proposal, to cover 
10 districts viz Gandhinagar, Chamba, Puducherry, 
Chhatrapati Sambhaji Nagar (Aurangabad), Mamit, 
Jodhpur, Khammam, Pilibhit, Gorakhpur, Leh (Ladakh). 
Under the project, these 4,740 CSCs will be upgraded 
with new common national branding without any other 
private branding. New service applications will be 
developed as and when required by the State Government 
/ Union Government. Further, Information, Education 
and Communication (IEC) would be provisioned under 
the project to spread awareness about the Government 
schemes / services etc.
This is new project being implemented by CSC 
e-Governance Services India Limited approved on 
27.09.2024 with a total budget outlay of Rs. 3160.88 
Lakh for a duration of 6 months plus extendable by 3 
months
2.4.5	 Digital India Bhashini
The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY), 
has 
formulated 
the 
National 
Language 
Translation Mission (NLTM), namely, Mission BHASHINI 
[BHASHa INterface for India] to transcend the language 
barrier for digital access. 
The National Language Translation Mission has started 
in March 2022 as a three-year mission with the vision 
of harnessing natural language technologies to create 
a diverse ecosystem of contributors, partnering entities 
and citizens for the purpose of transcending language 
barriers, thereby ensuring digital inclusion and digital 
empowerment in an AatmaNirbhar Bharat. 
To this end, the Mission aims to develop a public digital 
platform for enabling an easy and responsive ecosystem 
for translation among various Indian languages and 
English using Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Natural 
Language Processing (NLP). The platform will bring 
together multiple efforts towards Indic Language 
Technologies to build an Indian Language Technologies 
Ecosystem for Speech to Speech Machine Translation 
and evolve a Unified Language Interface (ULI) of Indian 
Languages.
In line with the above aim, the said public digital platform 
on Indian language technologies viz. Bhashini has 
recently gone live on https://bhashini.gov.in, following 
launch of the Mission as ‘Digital India Bhashini on 
4.7.2022 by Hon’ble Prime Minister. 
The Bhashini platform currently offers more than 350 
functional artificial intelligence (AI) models in 11 Indian 
languages and English for various purposes, such 
as text-to-text translation, speech-to-text conversion, 
text-to-speech conversion, transliteration and optical 
character recognition. The said models are available as 
an open source repository, along with open Application 
Programming Interfaces (APIs).
Deployment of language technology using AI models will 
entail creation of solutions using these models to enable 
various services as well as customisation for specific 
applications. 
Further, the technology will generate machine translation 
output which will also require human curation for many 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
38
purposes, for which both technological capabilities and 
implementation capacities will have to be augmented 
across the mission. The Mission, therefore, also aims 
to create and nurture an ecosystem involving startups 
and government agencies working together to develop 
and deploy innovative products and services in Indian 
languages. Currently, Mission Bhashini has onboarded 
more than 60 academic institutions/universities as 
partners for research and development activities.
Mission Bhashini aims to make the lives of Indian citizens 
better by connecting them to the Digital Initiatives of the 
country in their own language. The Bhashini Platform 
is interoperable and will catalyze the entire Digital 
Ecosystem thus enhancing the outreach of e-gov 
services. It is a giant step to realize our goal of Digital 
Government. 
To attain the desired outcomes, Mission Bhashini would 
engage all stakeholders in the ecosystem, especially 
State Governments and their agencies, Citizens, 
Startups, Industry, Academia, Civil Society, Publishers, 
On-line Media Companies, Industry Associations, and 
MSMEs. Thus, it is a pioneering Pan-India effort to unify 
the Nation by connecting people across India, bridging 
the linguistic barriers. 
To achieve the vision of maximizing Digital Technology 
for societal benefit, this mission aims to deliver innovative 
solutions for realizing the dream of Digitally Inclusive 
India. 
A close collaboration with the State Government(s) has 
been conceptualized in the form of State Language 
Missions that are a critical pillar of the Mission. The 
State Language Mission will drive various State specific 
language(s) initiatives and programmes, including 
crowdsourcing, startup engagement via challenge rounds 
and hackathons in partnership with the nodal institution(s)/
universities 
nominated 
by 
State 
Governments, 
development of local language technology ecosystem 
including local media and publishers and State-Specific 
instances on Bhashini Platform, wherein language-
specific tools and technologies will be made available for 
further use for all, including State Governments and their 
agencies.
Development and improvement of AI models is directly 
related to the size and quality of the available datasets 
of speech, text etc. in the language concerned. To give 
an impetus for rapid and sustained growth of Indian 
language datasets for the creation of better-performing 
models, a crowdsourcing initiative has also been 
launched simultaneously through BhashaDaan portal on 
Bhashini platform (https://bhashini.gov.in/bhashadaan) 
for public participation, wherein citizens can contribute 
their speech and text data for the Indian language(s) in 
order to enhance the accuracy of AI translation models for 
Indian languages. Mission Bhashini will enable massive 
citizen engagement, evoking the spirit of volunteering in 
the people of India to build this data for their own language 
through crowdsourcing initiative “Bhasha Daan”. 
Achievements:
1.	
Department of Administrative Reforms and Public 
Grievances (DARPG) for Centralized Public 
Grievance 
Redress 
and 
Monitoring 
System 
(CPGRAM) : For translating the regional language 
based grievance into the concerned officer’s 
specific language and then making the official reply 
available in the regional language.
2.	
Department of Health- e-Sanjeevani: To enable 
Speech to Speech translation between the Doctor 
and Patients using the BHASHINI’s ULCA Models.
3.	
NeGD- UMANG: Enabling the Chatbot service in 
different Indian Languages
4.	
NeGD - APISetu: For listing ULCA APIs on the 
APISetu platform for wider visibility of the Indic 
Language based models.
5.	
National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI)- 
Gas Booking: Making Phone based Gas booking 
system 
more 
intelligent, 
by 
automatically 
understanding the user’s speech using the 
BHASHINI’s ULCA Models and then processing 
the booking.
The transformative impact of the mission will be that 
the citizens of the country will be able to access various 
content and services (both government and private) in 
their own language. Some of the examples of the same 
include,

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
39
• 
Ability to access educational and news content in 
their own language
• 
Ability to do financial transactions in their own 
language
• 
Ability to access government services and policies 
in their own language.
1.	
An Independent Business Division (IBD), Digital 
India Bhashini Division (DIBD) has also been set 
up under Digital India Corporation (DIC) to anchor 
the Mission Bhashini activities and to nurture 
the language technology ecosystem especially 
involving startups.
2. 	
Crowd Sourcing Of Large Speech Data Sets 
to Enable Indian Language Speech – Speech 
Solutions (NLTM Pilot Project)
The recent advancements in the field of deep learning 
have allowed us to build speech-based solutions which 
are robust to language, speaker, and environmental 
variations. However, building good-quality speech 
systems is still a challenging task. One of the primitive 
blocks in building speech-based products is the Automatic 
Speech Recognition (ASR) system. To build an ASR 
system, it is needed to have a database that covers large 
amounts of training data from different speakers, different 
environments, and high-end computational resources. 
Over the last decade, there have been many attempts to 
create corpora for English speech recognition tasks from 
academia and industry. The performance of a speech 
recognition system mainly depends on the quality and 
size of the training corpora. It is observed that the 
amount of data available for languages like English is in 
the magnitude of a hundred thousand hours. Due to this, 
some of the studies claim that English ASR for a generic 
domain has achieved human parity (4%).
However, India is a land of language diversity, wherein it 
has around 1500 languages being spoken as a medium 
of communication. Out of which, 22 languages are 
recognized as scheduled languages by the Government of 
India. According to a recent census, 30 Indian languages 
have more than a million speakers. Among those 
languages, except for Hindi, all others are considered to 
be low-resourced. Due to the lack of a large, annotated 
speech corpus, many low-resource Indian languages 
struggle to utilize recent advancements in deep neural 
network architectures for Automatic Speech Recognition 
(ASR) tasks. Collecting large-scale databases is an 
expensive and time-consuming task. Current approaches 
lack extensive traditional expert-based data acquisition 
guidelines as they are tedious and complex. International 
Institute of Information Technology (IIIT) -Hyderabad 
has collected a Telugu speech corpus through a crowd-
sourcing approach through a project funded by MeitY. 
The main objective was to mitigate the low-resource 
problem for the Telugu language and open source the 
database for Indian startups and research purposes. 
As a part of this project, IIIT Hyderabad has built its 
own crowd-sourcing pipeline by incorporating certain 
protocols while collecting the database. By using this 
approach, IIIT Hyderabad has collected 2000.8 hours of 
transcribed data covering different regional variations of 
the Telugu language in three different speaking styles i.e., 
read, conversational and spontaneous on different topics 
like politics, sports, arts, science, etc. On this database, 
a challenge is running on building an automatic speech 
recognition system. 
3. 	
Enriching Telugu Language Wikipedia and 
other Indian Languages:
In Enriching Telugu Language Wikipedia and other Indian 
Languages project, IIIT Hyderabad (https://indicwiki.iiit.
ac.in), till date has achieved the set goal (400,000 lakh 
pages) and created 6 lakh pages (600,000) in various 
domains such as Biological Sciences, Medical Sciences, 
Astrology, Technology, Travel, Culture/Art, Sports, and 
Infotainment in Telugu. It is continued to explore even 
more domains. The unique contribution of the project is 
creating a system consisting of processes, platform and 
technology which enables human-bot interaction resulting 
in generating high-quality encyclopaedic content.
IIIT Hyderabad has created encyclopedic content using 
technology-assisted 
language 
and 
domain-specific 
bots, currently trained in publishing in Telugu and Hindi 
languages. IIIT Hyderabad has also developed cutting-
edge technology solutions and platforms to enable 
human-bot 
collaboration 
in 
creating 
encyclopedic 
knowledge articles. This platform and tools are being 
used to enhance the productivity of human volunteers 
and content creators for editing and enhancing the wiki 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
40
pages. At present working on reviewing the developed 
content in the last two years and making it available in a 
few other Indian languages
The URLs for the IIITH Sandbox –
a.	
Telugu - https://tewiki.iiit.ac.in/.
b.	
Hindi - https://hiwiki.iiit.ac.in/
4.	
Web Standardization Initiative:
The vision of Web Standardization Initiative (WSI) 
is to enable Indian language requirements in Web 
technologies Standards of World Wide Web Consortium 
(W3C), Unicode, Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) etc. 
through the formulation of Draft Recommendations, 
Guidelines, and Gap reports in consultation with 
stakeholders, Language and Technology experts. 
These are being implemented through time bound and 
technologically focused projects by academia/ industry/ 
R&D institutions/Industry bodies. The physical progress 
of the verticals under the activity is shown below:
• 
Submission 
of 
Locale 
Data 
in 
Unicode 
Common Locale Data Repository (CLDR): 
The Unicode Common Locale Data Repository 
(CLDR) provides key building blocks for software 
to support the world’s languages, with the largest 
and most extensive standard repository of locale 
data available. Although, the main categories for 
22 scheduled Indian languages were submitted 
earlier and identified some missing data for 
Kashmiri, Dogri, Odia languages, which have also 
been submitted for inclusion.
• 
Text segmentation requirements in Cascading 
Style Sheet: The recommendations of text layout 
requirements in areas such as Letter spacing, Line 
breaking, Vertical alignment, Initial styling letter, 
Counter styles(Alphabetic Bulleting) etc. has been 
submitted in W3C for proper and seamless access 
of text on the Web. The Draft Standards on the 
same has also been published in W3C.
• 
Character Model: World Wide Web: The complete 
requirement document for 6 languages namely 
Hindi, Bengali, Malayalam, Odia, Marathi and 
Gujarati has been developed with the consultation 
of Language Experts for string manipulation and 
searching on WWW and the same has also been 
submitted to W3C for further necessary action.
• 
Speech Standards: A document has been 
developed and submitted to IEEE that covers 
Hindi language requirements in Speech Synthesis 
Markup language (SSML), Speech Recognition 
Grammar Specification (SRGS) & Pronunciation 
Lexicon Specification (PLS) standards, which are 
used for speech recognition & synthesis systems.
• 
Publication POSTagSet Standard for Indian 
languages: Part-of-Speech (POS) Tagset were 
developed and submitted to BIS, which has also 
been published as Standard: ISO 17627 : 2021 
Linguistic Resources – Unified POS Tag Set for 
such as Bengali, Gujarati, Hindi, Kashmiri, Konkani, 
Maithili, Marathi, Punjabi, Urdu, Telugu, Kannada, 
Malayalam and Tamil.
2.4.6	 Capacity Building Scheme
Capacity Building scheme under Digital India programme 
was initially approved in 2008 and Capacity Building 
under phase II was approved in 2015. The objective of 
the project is to provide professional resources to States 
and provide training to political and policy level decision 
makers, managers and implementors of all States/UTs 
and Central Line Ministries to build the in-house capacity 
for implementation of various e-Governance initiatives. 
Under CB Phase-II programme, more than 20,000 
Government Officials have been trained. 
Capacity Building Scheme Phase III(CB Phase-III)
The new Capacity Building Project is approved for 
the next 3 years to address the augmentation of the 
competency requirements of the Government officers of 
Central line Ministries & State/UT, which will help for the 
speedy implementation of the Digital India transformative 
initiatives. 
The capacity building reform components include: 
a)	
Training & skilling with specialized training 
programmes & workshops.
b)	
Deployment of professional resources to State/UT 

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
41
c)	
Advanced learning platform with experiential 
learning (LXP)
d)	
Content development & management focussing on 
emerging technologies and needs
e)	
Collaboration and partnerships with national and 
international institutions 
f)	
Continuous engagement and participation of 
cohort via Centers of Excellence and Communities 
of Practice.
The Capacity Building Scheme Phase III is crucial for 
several reasons:
• 
Digital Transformation: It supports the Digital 
India initiative by building a workforce capable of 
managing and implementing digital projects.
• 
Sustainable Development: By enhancing the 
capacity of government employees, the scheme 
contributes to achieving Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) through improved governance and 
service delivery.
• 
Innovation and Efficiency: Training in emerging 
technologies fosters innovation and improves the 
efficiency of government operations.
• 
Inclusivity: The scheme promotes inclusivity by 
ensuring that all levels of government employees, 
including those in remote and undeserved 
areas, have access to training and development 
opportunities.
Implementation Status: (As on Sept, 2024):
(i)	
31 training programmes and webinars are 
conducted with 3979 participation across all 
Ministries and Dept. (including international 
bureaucrats/youth) 
(ii)	
3 induction modules of UMANG, myScheme and 
Visvesvaraya PhDscheme have been developed 
and uploaded on NeGD LMS. 
(iii)	
State 
Capacity 
Building 
Workshops 
were 
conceptualized in the F.Y. 2023-24 with a focus 
on emerging technologies such as AI in digital 
transformation, Data driven decision making for 
Government, Cloud computing, Generative AI, 
where requests from Manipur and Arunachal 
Pradesh have been received to conduct such 
workshops. In State specific CISOs, 4 State CISO’s 
workshops with 149 participation are conducted in 
MP, UP and Uttarakhand. 
(iv)	
Future readiness series on Digital Governance 
are 
being 
conducted 
in 
collaboration 
with 
Government practitioners and industry partners 
with exposure to build digital readiness amongst 
them for adoption of emerging technologies such 
as Artificial Intelligence, Cyber Security, IoT etc. to 
catalyse public service delivery more efficiently and 
effectively. 2 masterclasses have been conducted 
till date with 373 participation. A new set of series 
is planned in this year.
(v)	
Development of 8 national case studies is in 
process. The first 2 are identified as case study on 
DigiLocker and UMANG.
(vi)	
State e-Mission Team (SeMT) is a team of 
professionals attached to State IT department to 
provide technical/professional support to the State 
decision and policy-making bodies (State Apex 
Committee). In this project, along with dedicated 
techno-programme management resources in 
State/UT, a pool of specialised resources will 
also be deployed centrally on specific emerging 
technologies.
(vii)	 A dedicated portal was deployed for SeMTs for 
managing them. The portal is going to be closed 
and tea is working on bringing unified.
2.4.7	 E-Greeting Portal and Sampark 2.0 
Enabling 
bi-directional 
Government 
and 
citizen 
engagement 
in 
governance 
leveraging 
various 
e-channels (like emails, SMS, Miss-Call, OBD (Out 
Bound Dialing)) along with enhanced services and 
offerings of the project.
Approved on: 23rd April, 2020 for a period of 5 years i.e. 
till 31st Mar, 2025 
Outlay: Rs. 54.042 Cr.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
42
Achievements: 
As on 31st December 2024 the following is achieved
• 
278.02 Cr Bulk SMS pushed
•	
226.83 Cr second of OBD  
•	
3807.43 Cr emails
•	
 17.83 Cr. OTT services 
•	
7074 Templates designed through crowd sourcing
•	
8.06 Lakh e-greeting shared
2.4.8	 Awareness and Communication plan for Digital 
India
Awareness and Communication (A&C) is an integral 
component of the Digital India Programme. A&C performs 
the crucial role of generating and raising the level of 
awareness about Digital India, its schemes, initiatives 
and services amongst diverse stakeholders across the 
country. The main objectives of A&C activities are:
(a)	
Expand visibility of Digital India
(b) 
Help citizens understand the benefits of Digital 
India.
(c)	
Facilitate demand creation for various services 
leading to more adoption of services
(d)	
Create Awareness and wide publicity including 
event based publicity etc., through various media- 
social media, radio, TV, print, outdoor media & 
activities around Government of India Schemes 
and Digital India services.
(e)	
Inform, Educate, Communicate & Sensitize citizens 
about usage & benefits of services & schemes.
(f)	
Expand reach of Digital India programme globally 
(g)	
Establish the brand “Digital India” by way of effective 
branding exercise across various platforms- Mass 
Media, Social Media, Rural Outreach etc. 
Some of the major events organised by A&C Team , 
NeGD are 
(i)	
Semicon India 2024 Conference – (September 
11 – 13, 2024), at India Expo Mart in Greater 
Noida, Uttar Pradesh. The three-day conference 
from 11 to 13th September showcased India’s 
semiconductor strategy and policy which envisions 
making India a global hub for semiconductors. 
(ii)	
India AI Mission: Roundtable Discussion on 
AI Innovate: Empowering Tomorrow’s Startups 
(August 27, 2024) held at the Vigyan Bhawan 
Annexe Building (Committee Room A), on August 
27, 2024. The roundtable was held to discuss 
challenges faced by AI start-ups and formulated 
effective policies. 
(iii)	
State 
Consultation 
Workshop 
on 
Creating 
Enabling Eco-System for Services in Tier 2 & 3 
Cities (August 31, 2024) hosted at Mayfair Lagoon, 
Bhubaneswar. The workshop was participated 
by Shri Manoj Ahuja, Chief Secretary, Odisha; 
Shri S Krishnan, Secretary, MeitY, Shri Abhishek 
Singh, Additional Secretary, MeitY, Ms. Anu 
Garg, 
Development 
Commissioner-cum-ACS, 
Government of Odisha; Shri Vishal Dev, Principal 
Secretary, Electronics and Information Technology 
Department, Government of Odisha; and senior 
government officials from 24 States and Union 
Territories across India. 
(iv)	
RBI@90 (August 26 – 27, 2024) commemorating 
90 years of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), 
‘Global Conference on Digital Public Infrastructure 
and Emerging Technologies’ was organized by RBI 
in Bangalore from August 26 – 27, 2024. NeGD on 
behalf of MeitY participated in the exhibition and 
set up stalls showcasing DigiLocker, Entity Locker 
and UMANG. 
(v)	
Various Social meida Coverages
2.4.9	 Modernization/Digitalisation of Nagaland Fire 
& Emergency-Management System (NFES-MS)
A pilot project being implemented by Directorate of Fire & 
Emergency Services, Govt. of Nagaland, with estimated 
outlay of Rs. 3.88 crore for a period of 30 months, has 
been sanctioned by MeitY in June, 2023. The objective 
of the project is to develop a centralized management 
system for the Nagaland Fire & Emergency Service 
(NF&ES) for creating a cost effective environment, faster 
and better service delivery to the department and stake 

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
43
holders, ushering and thus increasing overall efficiency 
and effectiveness in the Government processes. The 
project is under implementation. The Command & Control 
Centre is ready for go-live. Modules of Nagaland Fire & 
Emergency Services-Management System (NFES-MS) 
are at various stages of development. The project is 
currently being implemented as pilot project in 3 districts 
of Nagaland namely, Kohima, Dimapur and Mokokchung.
2.4.10	 GOV.IN Appstore
‘GOV.IN 
Appstore’, 
India’s 
indigenous 
Appstore 
developed under ‘AatmaNirbhar Bharat Mission’, which 
is aimed at mainstreaming the mobile app industry in the 
country. The ‘GOV.IN AppStore’ platform (https://apps.
mgov.gov.in) streamlines access to government services 
across sectors viz. health, education, agriculture, 
financial, online payments, electoral services, social 
welfare, food, transport, energy, etc. Accessible through 
both its website and mobile app, GOV.IN AppStore 
empowers developers and enhances service delivery for 
citizens nationwide.
Uploading apps is convenient and free of cost. Only 
verified and signed apps (APK/APKS/AAB files) can be 
hosted on the AppStore. Before hosting, every app goes 
through rigorous security tests and only secure apps are 
hosted on this Appstore. This transparency fosters trust 
between App developers and the government.
Achievements: 
• 
Total 2,279 mobile apps from different domains 
with most popular apps like UMANG, Aarogya Setu, 
BHIM, DigiLocker, and many more are available on 
GOV.IN AppStore.
• 
More than 9.08 Crore+ apps downloaded till now. 
Recently, 1,46,789 new users were onboarded on 
GOV.IN Appstore.
2.5	
Digital India Initiatives by NIC
National Informatics Centre (NIC) offers various platforms 
and services in key sectors such as Agriculture, Education, 
Health and Family Welfare, Transport, Finance, Law 
and Justice, Social Welfare & Skill Development, Home 
Affairs, and Food & Public Distribution. These services 
are accessible through multiple channels, promoting the 
advantages of enterprise mobility and easy access for 
the benefit of all.
2.5.1	 Agriculture & Food Processing
2.5.1.1	 PM KISAN- Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAmman 
Nidhi (https://pmkisan.gov.in/)
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM-KISAN) portal 
developed and managed by NIC provides an end-to-end 
technology solution for transferring the funds directly 
into the accounts of the farmers identified by States/
UTs. Under the PM-KISAN Scheme, eligible landholding 
farmer families receive ` 6,000 annually through three 
installments of ` 2,000 each, disbursed every four 
months directly into their bank accounts via the PM-
KISAN portal. With the 18th installment release, the total 
disbursement under the scheme exceeded ` 3.45 lakh 
crore, supporting more than 11 crore farmers nationwide 
and further reaffirming the government’s commitment to 
rural development and agricultural prosperity.
PM KISAN Mobile App
(URL:-https://play.google.com/store/apps/
details?id=com.nic.project.pmkisan)
The PM-KISAN mobile app enhances transparency 
and expands farmer outreach, serving as a simple and 
efficient extension of the PM-KISAN web portal.
2.5.1.2	 Seed 
Authentication, 
Traceability 
and 
Holistic Inventory (SATHI) (https://seedtrace.gov.in)
SATHI is a national platform implemented by the 
collaborative efforts of the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers’ Welfare, Government of India, and the National 
Informatics Centre (NIC). It is an integrated digital 
ecosystem for seeds including Breeder seed production 
centers, Indenters, Seed certification agencies, Seed 
Producers, processing plants, State Seed Testing Labs, 
Central Seed Testing Lab, Enforcement agencies of 
states etc. and Seed Supply Chain across the nation. 
The SATHI may be considered as tools to achieve the 
vision of formation of a National Seed Grid where all the 
stakeholders can be integrated seamlessly to create a 
market ecosystem based on quality seed, connecting 
supply to demand, traceability of seed, predictable 
market, competitive pricing.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
44
2.5.1.3	 FARMAP 
2.0 
(Farm 
Analysis 
Package) 
(https://farmap.dac.gov.in)
FARMAP is a web-based system developed by NIC to 
facilitate capturing of data from 9,720 sample farmers 
from 19 states, 810 Tehsils, 1620 Villages, 9720 farmers 
in 22 Record Types, validation of data through a workflow-
based system and processing of data to generate Crop 
wise state level cost estimates.
CCS-mTracker mobile app has been hosted on Google 
play store to track the visits of Field man & Field 
Supervisors to improve the quality of data.
Benefits of FARMAP 2.0
• 
Data collection, compilation and validation are 
made more efficient
• 
Data is transparent.
• 
Data Processing time reduced.
• 
Reduced Time lag in providing Cost estimates to 
CACP.
• 
Better monitoring of Implementing Agencies & 
Field Officials.
2.5.1.4	 DBT in Fertilizers /e-Urvarak/ Integrated 
Fertilizer Management System (https://dbtfert.nic.in/ 
- IFMS, https://urvarak.nic.in/ - IFMS Dashboard)
e-Urvarak or iFMS (Integrated Fertilizer Management 
System) represents an advancement in supply chain 
governance and subsidy claim processing in the country. 
Boasting a user base exceeding 3.5 lakh (Govt. and 
Private) and facilitating transactions for more than 
13 crore fertilizer buyers nationwide, e-Urvarak has 
emerged as a cornerstone of efficiency and transparency 
in the critical sector. The system regulates the nationwide 
production, movement and e-PoS sale of over 640 LMT 
fertilizer in over 18 crore transactions while processing 

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
45
the subsidy claims on a weekly basis which amounted to 
Rs. 2.0 Lakh Crore in 2023-24.
NIC has been the technological partner of the Department 
of Fertilizers in providing extensive strategic control over 
the entire fertilizer supply chain, including:
A.	
Transactional Data Collection
B.	
Real-Time Data Dashboard/ MIS Reports
C.	
Comprehensive Subsidy Management
2.5.1.5	 SAMPADA 
Suite 
(https://sampada-mofpi.
gov.in) 
NIC has developed a web-based application suite named 
“Sampada Portal” for various schemes under which the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) provides 
grants to various promoters desirous of setting up different 
types of Food Processing Facilities. The different modules 
of the suite, based on different schemes of the Ministry 
provide an online system for submitting application 
for setting up food processing facilities, evaluation of 
the same by the different divisions of the Ministry and 
Project Management Agencies engaged by the ministry, 
approval/rejection of applications, monitoring of grant 
release installments and final closure of a project. 
The Scheme has so far generated direct employment to 
the tune of about 83000 and processing and preservation 
capacity to the tune of about 226 lakh Metric Tonne and 
72 Lakh Metric Tonne respectively.
2.5.1.6	 PMFME Portal (https://pmfme.mofpi.gov.in)
A national level portal has been developed for the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) under 
NIC’s supervision which has automated the complete 
workflow starting from registration, generating a DPR and 
submission of application for grant by various micro food 
processing enterprises, evaluation of the applications 
by the District Level Committee/Ministry, forwarding 
application to bank for sanction of loan, sanction of loan 
by bank, sanction of grant by the Ministry, providing 
training and handholding support for upgradation of 
skills and technical knowhow, providing branding and 
marketing support, getting financial support from other 
such schemes of the Central/State Government etc. In 
addition, the portal also generates MIS reports of various 
kinds for all these activities, maintains accounting 
and budget information, integrates with a Learning 
Management System and a GIS based system showing 
One District One Product data on the geographical map 
of India and individual districts.
The scheme has so far received application to the tune 
of about 321311 and total loan and grant sanctioned to 
104697 beneficiaries.
2.5.1.7	 Farmer Registration and Unified beneficiary 
Information System (FRUITS) (http://fruits.karnataka.
gov.in)
FRUITS is an e-Governance project for managing and 
maintaining farmer registry which can be used by all 
agriculture and allied departments for providing benefits 
under various governments schemes to eligible farmers. 
FRUITS is evolving as a soft infrastructure project in the 
agriculture sector acting as an inventory of farmers, land 
owned by them, and benefits extended.
CURRENT STATISTICS:
• 
Farmer Registered: 99 Lakh
•	
Scheme Covered: 49
•	
No Of Farmers Availed Benefits: 81 Lakh
•	
Amount Assistance Provided: 31,083.29 Crores 
(from January 2019)
•	
No Of DBT Transactions: 8.9 Crores (from 
January 2019)
2.5.2	 Health & Family Welfare
2.5.2.1	 e-Hospital and NextGen e-Hospital (https://
nextgen.ehospital.gov.in/)
The e-Hospital application is being offered as an as-is 
product to the government hospitals across the country 
through SaaS (Software as a service) model. The 
modules of e-Hospital application which are currently 
available on cloud are Patient Registration (OPD & 
Casualty), IPD (Admission, Discharge & Transfer), 
Billing, Lab Information System, Radiology Information 
System, Clinic, Dietary, Laundry, Store & Pharmacy and 
OT Management. 
Online Registration System (ORS) is an online patient 
portal for citizens to book online appointments for the 
hospitals and for providing patient centric services like 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
46
viewing lab reports, checking blood availability status, 
and making online payment. Citizen can now use the 
ORS portal in English, Hindi, and 14 other languages. 
These include Assamese, Bengali, Gujarati, Kannada, 
Kashmiri, Malayalam, Nepali, Odia, Punjabi, Sanskrit, 
Sindhi, Tamil, Telugu, and Urdu.
The NextGen e-Hospital application has been 
developed based on the National Digital Health Blueprint 
and is compliant with various standards like EHR 
Standards, Meta Data & Data Standards – Health etc. It 
has been developed using Master Code Directories and 
Registries to ensure standardization of data across the 
system. New modules developed are Ambulance, Allied 
Services (Passes and Certificate), MRD, Hospital Admin 
(Admission Cancellation Approval, Patient Updation 
Report, User Assigned Report) and Feedback System. 
NextGen eHospital was implemented in the Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia for Haj Pilgrims in 2023 and 2024. 330734 
e-prescription were generated in Haj Pilgrimage in 2024. 
OPD, IPD, Clinic, Laboratory, Store, Pharmacy and 
Ambulance modules were utilized.
NextGen eHospital has also been implemented in 42 
Central Armed Police Forces hospitals of the Ministry of 
Home Affairs across the country.
2.5.2.2	 Collaborative Digital Diagnosis System
eCollabDDS is a web based comprehensive Teleradiology 
solution which enables the transmission of images such 
as X-rays, CTs and MRIs from one geographical location 
to another which can be viewed and interpreted by the 
Radiologist for diagnosis or consultation purposes. 
eCollabDDS has been customized for Telepathology 
consultation also with the inputs from PGI Chandigarh. 
Through eSanjeevani, cases were uploaded from various 
health facilities in Haryana and PGI Chandigarh reported 
back the cases for Telepathology consultation.
eCollabDDS has been integrated with eSanjeevani and 
NextGen e-Hospital for TeleRadiology consultation for 
better reach. eCollabDDS has been enabled with Artificial 
Intelligence for Chest X-Ray images. The AI will predict 
the presence/ absence of 7 Radiological Detection 
features for Tuberculosis which will aid the Radiologist 
for reaching a better diagnosis.
Currently eCollabDDS is being used by FHQ, BSF 
Hospital through NextGen platform for uploading X-rays 
in DICOM format and the images are viewed and reports 
are being prepared by the Radiologists at BSF Hospital 
in Srinagar and Shillong.
2.5.2.3	 Central Government Health Scheme (https://
cghs.nic.in)
Central Government Health Scheme caters to the 
healthcare needs of eligible beneficiaries enrolled 
under the scheme). Almost 47.23 lakh beneficiaries 
are enrolled for CGHS health services. 470 Wellness 
Centers (Dispensaries) across 74 cities cater health and 
wellness services under supervision of 24 Additional 
Director Offices in Allopathic and AYUSH (Ayurvedik, 
Yoga, Unani, Siddha, Homeopathic) systems. The 
beneficiaries can book appointments, download CGHS 
Card, search Dispensaries, empaneled Hospital/ Labs 
through Mobile App. DigiLocker may also be used to 
download CGHS plastic card.
2.5.2.4	 Reproductive & Child Health (RCH)
Reproductive and Child Health (RCH) is an innovative 
name-based system to capture information on all RCH 
related services including family planning, maternal 
health, Child health and immunization and to monitor 
performance at all levels (National, State, District, Block, 
PHC and Sub Centre level).
ANMOL (ANM online) is a tablet based android 
application for RCH, which allows ANMs to enter and 
update service records of beneficiaries (Eligible Couple, 
Pregnant Women and Children).
RCH/ANMOL have been integrated with Ayushman 
Bharat Digital Health Mission (ABDM).
More than 28.14 Lakh beneficiaries registered in RCH/
ANMOL have been linked with ABHA. Out of this, more 
than 10 Lakh ABHA have been created using RCH/
ANMOL platform.
2.5.2.5	 NHM-PMS (National Health Mission - Progress 
Monitoring System) (https://nhmpms.gov.in)
National Health Mission Progress Monitoring System 
(NHM PMS) is an application developed for allocating, 
managing, monitoring, and updating the physical and 

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
47
financial progress for various health schemes from top to 
grassroot level. It is a Single Sign On (SSO), two factor 
Authentication, user friendly and 24*7 available portal 
with inbuilt informative dashboard, various reporting 
format and user-based query reporting tool. Through this 
umbrella structured application, currently four schemes 
are onboarded and running smoothly PAN India. These 
schemes have 365 sub components. 
2.5.2.6	 Sickle Cell Anaemia Elimination Mission
The National Sickle Cell Anaemia Elimination Mission 
was announced in the Union Budget 2023 and the 
program is currently being implemented in 17 identified 
states, including Gujarat, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, 
Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, West 
Bengal, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Andhra 
Pradesh, Karnataka, Assam, Uttar Pradesh, Kerala, 
Bihar, and Uttarakhand. Sickle Cell Disease is a group of 
blood disorders genetically inherited and specially found 
in the tribal population of India. Government of India has 
launched a mission mode project for enrolment, testing, 
identification, and maintenance of electronics health 
records of citizens screened for Sickle cell disease, 
Thalassemia disease & other blood disorders. 
2.5.2.7	 Indian 
Public 
Health 
Standards 
(IPHS) 
Dashboard
IPHS (Indian Public Health Standards) are a set of 
uniform standards envisaged to improve the quality of 
health care delivery in the country. Standards have been 
revised as IPHS 2022. The IPHS Dashboard is a digital 
platform for monitoring IPHS compliance status of public 
health facilities. Dashboard Provides a comprehensive 
overview of the assessment status and compliance 
status. Health Facilities include District Hospitals, Sub-
District Hospitals, Community Health Centers, Primary 
Health Centers. The Ministry aims to ensure that all 
healthcare institutions adhere to the IPHS 2022 (latest 
IPHS), thereby guaranteeing the delivery of quality health 
services to every citizen.
2.5.3	 Finance
2.5.3.1	 Public Financial Management System (PFMS)
PFMS aims to establish an integrated digital finance 
network for payments, receipts, accounting and to 
provide a Management Information System for the 
Government 
of 
India, 
Ministries/Departments 
of 
Central and State Governments. It provides a financial 
management platform for all plan schemes, a database 
of all recipient agencies and integration with core banking 
solutions of banks handling plan funds, integration with 
State Treasuries and efficient and effective tracking of 
fund flow to the lowest level of implementation for plan 
schemes of the Government.
2.5.3.2	 e-Way Bill (https://ewaybillgst.gov.in; https://
ewaybill2.gst.gov.in)
The GST e-Way Bill mechanism is put in place to ensure 
that goods are transported in accordance with GST 
laws and tax is paid for the supply of goods. e-Way Bill 
is an electronic document which gives details regarding 
the movement of goods and needs to be carried by 
transporters for any consignment exceeding Rs.50,000. 
e-Way bill has been interfaced with Fastag-RFID and 
Vahan system to verify/monitor the movement of vehicles 
updated in e-Way Bill. RFID based EWB reports have 
helped the department officers in conducting effective 
vigilance on the roads. The Comprehensive Analytics on 
e-Way Bill system for officers has helped in identifying 
fraudulent transactions by taxpayers.
2.5.3.3	 GST Prime
GST Prime is an analytical tool, developed by NIC, 
Karnataka for the GST officers. This has played an 
important role in improving the indirect tax collection of 
the State as well as of the Central GST. The GST officers 
have been dependent on the application for their day-to-
day activities in terms of monitoring the tax compliance, 
to identify and initiate appropriate actions against the 
non-filers of returns, identifying and highlighting the 
possible fraudulent activities carried out by taxpayers 
in order to evade taxes, establishing relations / possible 
links with other stakeholders in case of frauds, identifying 
and reversal of ineligible Input Tax Credit claims and 
having complete information on the taxpayers through 
the taxpayer profile etc. 
GST Prime is now rolled out for all the States and Central 
GST formations across the country from a common 
infrastructure. GST Prime 4 with new features has been 
rolled out and GST Prime Lite - a mobile app is going to 
be released shortly.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
48
For ease of use, Single Sign On (GSTSSO) facility has 
been introduced which enables the GST officers to 
access all the NIC developed GST applications such as 
GST Prime, E Way Bill MIS, E Way Bill Analytics, E Way 
Bill Dashboard and e-Invoice Analytics using single URL 
and single set of credentials.
2.5.3.4	 e-Invoicing 
System 
(https://einvoice1.gst.
gov.in , https://einvoice2.gst.gov.in)
GST e-invoicing system is a system of reporting the 
invoices being issued by the taxpayers to their customers, 
on the Government portal on a near real time basis and 
obtaining a unique Invoice Reference Number (IRN). 
E-invoice system was launched on 1st Oct 2020 for the 
taxpayers in a phased manner based on the Annual 
Aggregate Turn Over (AATO) and is now mandatory for 
all the taxpayers above Rs 5 Crore.
It has many advantages for businesses such as 
standardized & digitally verifiable e-Invoices, enhanced 
interoperability between various stakeholders- suppliers, 
recipients, transporters, Government and financial 
institutions, auto-population of invoice details in GST 
returns and e-way bill. It has also controlled the issuance 
of fake invoices or claiming excess input tax credit and at 
the same time facilitating quick ITC credit to the genuine 
recipients. 
In the last 4 years, 700 Crore of e-invoices have been 
generated involving 16 lakh total suppliers and 140 lakh 
total recipients.
2.5.3.5	 e-Abgari
e-Abgari project is an end-to-end supply chain 
management system of Beverage Alcohol, Medicinal 
Alcohol, Industrial Alcohol & Life Saving Narcotic Drugs in 
state excise sector enabling better regulation to minimize 
the social and public health import while safeguarding 
the revenue collection from excisable articles. 
Presently, 72 e-Services are being rendered in workflow-
based manner for Grant & Renewal of Licenses, 
Packaged Liquor Brand Registration, Issuance of NOC/
Permit/Passes for Import/Export/Transport, Real-time 
management of Spirit/Packaged Liquor Inventory and 
Excise Revenue, e-Chemical Examination Laboratory 
and management of Excise Offender Cases, Enforcement 
Activity. All Distilleries, Manufactories, Distributors, Retail 
Shops and Hospitals, Educational Institutes & Industrial 
Units connect eAbgari for Production / Procurement / 
Sell of alcohol.
Process / Scenario
Pre-eAbgari period
Now
Issuance of Permits / 
Passes
15-30 days
3-48 hours
Label Registration of 
Packaged Liquor
20 - 45 days
3-72 hours
Permission for importing  
life-saving drugs
20 - 30 days
3-48 hours
Payment of duties and 
fees
Cumbersome & 
during office hours
Instant and 24 × 7
Status of Service 
Requests by stakeholders
Lack of 
transparency
Instant - both 
online and through 
SMS, Email
Tracking & Tracing of a 
bottle/case
Not available
Instant & 24×7
Refund Option of wrong 
payment
Not available
Instant & 24×7
2.5.3.6	 Indian Customs Electronic Data Interchange 
System (ICES)
ICES Application covers around 99 percent of India’s 
International Trade taking in its ambit 560 locations 
(including SEZ sites) spread across the country.
Major benefits of ICES include-data consolidation for 
National Level Management Information Systems (MIS) 
to support future trade policy, standardization of customs 
clearance methodologies, and the implementation of 
contactless, paperless, and faceless procedures. It 
provides real-time duty rate updates and expedites 
customs clearances, reducing processing times and 
enhancing overall efficiency. ICES transforms customs 
operations into a more streamlined and user-friendly 
experience.
2.5.3.7	 e-Auction India (https://coaleauction.co.in)
eAuction India is a platform to conduct online auctions 
for lease, sale and purchase of commodities by Govt 
Departments/Organisations. 
Facilitates 
Forward 
/ 
Reverse, Multi / Single Lot Auction.
Implemented by 23 States/ UTs and 37 Central 
Government organizations. Since 2013, 56,405 auctions 
worth 17,700.23 Crore have been processed till 31st 
December 2024

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
49
6th Round of eAuction of PM Mementos:
The mementos gifted to the Hon’ble PM Shri Narendra 
Modi were auctioned for the Sixth consecutive year 
during 17th Sept 2024 to 31st Oct 2024 using eAuction 
India platform developed by NIC. Over 8000 Mementos 
were auctioned till sixth rounds and more than 25000 
people participated. The platform has the composite 
feature of image as well as video display of various items 
which can be used as per need. It also has sections for 
highlighted items, Be the first to Bid, Most Participated 
Auction etc
2.5.3.8	 TRADESTAT 
– 
India’s 
Foreign 
Trade 
Statistics (https://tradestat.commerce.gov.in)
The system offers monthly and annual time series 
analysis of India’s foreign trade for the past 25 years. It 
provides insights into country-wise, commodity-wise, and 
region-wise trade, utilizing an enhanced classification 
system based on the 8-digit ITC code, exceeding the 
World Customs Organization’s (WCO) 6-digit HS code. 
With over 12,500 commodities classified, the system, 
maintained by DGCI&S, Kolkata, presents data in both 
Rupees and US Dollars. Accessible to the public it 
facilitates analysis on a financial and calendar year basis.
2.5.4	 Education
2.5.4.1	 School Learning and Management Platforms
NIC’s School Education Solutions have a broad-reaching 
impact, ensuring that basic education is accessible to 
students from diverse backgrounds and all corners of 
society, thus benefiting a wide range of individuals.
PM SHRI application (https://pmshri.education.gov.
in)
The objective is to select and manage over 14,500 model 
schools, ensuring a nurturing environment for more than 
20 lakh students. The scheme utilizes the Prabandh 
Portal 
(https://prabandh.education.gov.in/pmshri) 
to 
streamline financial activities, ensuring data accuracy and 
providing real-time dashboards for effective monitoring. 
and enhance data accuracy. 
Vidyanjali (https://vidyanjali.education.gov.in)
The Vidyanjali connects volunteers with government 
schools 
across 
India, 
enabling 
contributions 
of 
knowledge, assets, and materials. The platform features 
real-time dashboards and streamlines project modules 
for effective participation. 
Online Teaching, Learning and Assessment System 
(OTLAS) (https://ullas.education.gov.in)
The Online Teaching, Learning and Assessment System 
(OTLAS) empowers over 5 crore adults under the 
ULLAS initiative, offering literacy through digital tools. 
Developed by NIC, the portal enables learner registration, 
assessment, and certification, integrating with NIOS. 
Integrated 
ShalaDarpan 
Portal 
(https://
rajshaladarpan.nic.in/)
The Integrated ShalaDarpan Portal, developed by NIC 
Rajasthan, is a comprehensive tool supporting over 
66,000 government schools, tracking the academic 
progress of 95+ lakh students and 4.3+ lakh staff 
members. It streamlines daily operations like admissions, 
attendance, and exams, while efficiently managing staff 
recruitment, posting, and beneficiary schemes. The 
portal disburses `1,500 crore in Direct Benefit Transfer 
(DBT) scholarships, ensuring financial aid for 50+ lakh 
students 
RAJPSP Portal (https://rajpsp.nic.in) 
The RAJPSP Portal, developed by NIC Rajasthan, 
efficiently manages 42,000 private schools and over 90 
lakh student admissions. It streamlines processes like 
RTE admissions, reimbursements, and school recognition 
(Manyta), ensuring transparency and accountability. 
With `3000 crore processed for 12 lakh RTE students, 
it supports online applications, fee determinations, and 
school verifications. This bilingual portal revolutionizes 
Rajasthan’s education system, fostering transparency 
and efficient school management.
SSPortal (https://ssportal.kerala.gov.in)
The SSPortal grades 304 special schools in Kerala, 
serving 15,000 students, and allocates packages based 
on grades. The hsTransfer (https://dhsetransfer.kerala.
gov.in) manages transfers for 13,000 higher secondary 
teachers in 847 government schools. The vhsTransfer 
(https://vhseportal.kerala.gov.in) 
handles 
2,500 
vocational teachers across 262 schools. Developed, 
maintained, and supported by NIC Kerala for efficient 
education administration.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
50
School Education Portal Uttarakhand
The NIC Uttarakhand’s School Education Portal 
Uttarakhand, launched in January 2016, provides a 
comprehensive eGovernance platform for the state’s 
educational sector. It digitally houses profiles for 
approximately 61,000 teachers, 20,000 schools, and 
over 800,000 students, streamlining processes like 
teacher transfers, document verification, and guest 
teacher recruitment. With features like the DAKSH 
dashboard for performance monitoring and e-Service 
books, it enhances transparency and efficiency in 
managing educational resources.
Chandigarh Online Admission Portal
The Chandigarh Online Admission Portal revolutionizes 
the admission process for 112 government and 57 
recognized private schools for the 2024-25 academic 
session. With 2,820 total applicants, 2,721 were eligible, 
resulting in 836 successful placements via a transparent 
online lottery system. This centralized platform ensures 
fair access and simplifies applications for parents.
SARAL (Systematic administrative reforms for 
achieving learning by students) Education Project
The SARAL Education Project by NIC Maharashtra 
integrates platforms like the RET Portal for RTE 
admissions, SanchManyta Portal for staff approvals, 
School Portal for school data, and the Sanstha Portal 
for institutional mapping. SARAL supports over 117,000 
schools, 2.14 crore students, and 5.70 lakh teachers. 
The Mid-Day Meal (MDM) Portal benefits 86,000+ 
schools, while the eMarksheet Portal offers online 
verification of 6.1 crore 10th and 4.23 crore 12th records.
2.5.4.2	 Examination and Admission Services
The 
e-Counselling 
system 
offers 
comprehensive 
admission and counselling services, encompassing 
everything from registration to college and course 
selection, and finally, the generation of admission letters. 
It caters to both candidates and admission providers by 
facilitating a wide range of essential services throughout 
the 
admission 
process. 
These 
services 
include 
registration, choice filling, fee payments, and admission 
letter issuance. For admission providers, the system 
efficiently manages seat matrices and master data, while 
offering tools to monitor registrations, fee payments, and 
choices filled, ensuring an accurate assessment of the 
admissions processed.

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
51
This year, the Medical Counselling Committee (MCC) 
introduced a Common Admission Data Sharing Portal 
for medical counselling. This portal enables authorities at 
both the national (All India) and state levels to access and 
cross-check medical admission data across the country. 
This year the e-counselling solution won the Gems of 
Digital India- Jury’s Choice Award. 
2.5.4.3	 National Scholarship Portal
The National Scholarship Portal (NSP) serves as a 
comprehensive, end-to-end solution for streamlining 
scholarship disbursement. The key features like the One-
Time Registration (OTR) process, which allows students 
to register once and use the credentials throughout their 
academic career. Aadhaar-based Face Authentication 
(FaceAuth) ensures the authenticity of applicants and 
aids in deduplication with other scholarship portals. 
NSP provides a Common Standard Application Form 
for all schemes, simplifying the submission process. 
Through the Student Dashboard, students can track 
their application status and receive SMS updates, while 
the Grievance Redressal System and Helpdesk enhance 
user support. Integration with Common Service Centres 
(CSCs) enables students to complete OTR and form 
submissions at nominal charges.
As of now, NSP has supported over 6.31 crore recipients, 
with the total scholarship disbursal exceeding `35,194 
crore.
2.5.4.4	 Schemes and Welfare Program Management
The 
PM 
POSHAN 
Portal 
(https://pmposhan.
education.gov.in) built for the PM POSHAN (Pradhan 
Mantri Poshan Shakti Nirman) scheme which aims to 
provide hot cooked meals to 11.80 crore children in 
11.20 lakh government and government-aided schools 
from 2021-2026. With an investment exceeding `24,400 
crore, this centrally sponsored initiative fights hunger 
and promotes school attendance. Key digital platforms 
https://pmposhan-ams.education.gov.in, and https://
pmposhan-mis.education.gov.in, 
ensure 
real-time 
monitoring of meal distribution, data visualization, and 
reporting across schools and UTs. 
2.5.4.5 
Educational 
Institutes 
Information 
Management
Effective 
information 
management 
in 
educational 
institutes is paramount for facilitating data-driven 
decision-making, ensuring the security and accessibility 
of valuable educational data.
UDISE+ (https://udiseplus.gov.in/) is India’s largest 
school education database, covering 14.89 lakh schools, 
26.52 crore students, and 95 lakh teachers. 
The Performance Grading Index (PGI) (https://
pgi.udiseplus.gov.in/) evaluates India’s expansive 
education system, which comprises over 1.5 million 
schools, 9.5 million teachers, and 265 million students. 
The All-India Survey on Higher Education (AISHE) 
is the primary source for comprehensive statistics on 
India’s higher education landscape, encompassing 
70,000+ institutions, including universities and colleges. 
Through the dedicated portal (https://aishe.gov.in), 
AISHE collects data on critical parameters such as 
student enrollment, foreign students, and educational 
infrastructure. 
The PM-USHA Portal (https://pmusha.education.gov.
in) serves as a comprehensive Management Information 
System (MIS) for the Pradhan Mantri Uchchatar Shiksha 
Abhiyan, aimed at enhancing higher education under 
NEP 2020
2.5.4.6	 Educational Products and Solutions
CollabGEO (https://collabgeo.nic.in) is an indigenous 
web-based collaborative 2D geometry tool that enriches 
the teaching and learning of geometry concepts in Indian 
schools, aligning with NCERT curricula for classes 6th to 
10th, with features like geometry creation, annotations, 
measurements, real-time collaboration, and more, 
aiming to improve math education. This application has 
been onboarded to DIKSHA Portal. 
CollabCAD 
(https://collabcad.gov.in) 
is 
a 
3D/2D 
Engineering Drawing Software system, for the education 
sector available on desktop and collaborative network 
enabled systems benefiting CBSE affiliated schools’ 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
52
students studying engineering graphics in class XI-XII. 
A web-based 3D viewer platform is also available for 
students and academicians to visualize 3D digital models 
directly over modern web-browsers without installing any 
software or plugins.
2.5.5	 e-Transport
2.5.5.1	 About eTransport MMP
One of the key IT initiatives by the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways (MoRTH) to modernize 
transport sector management and operations is the 
eTransport Mission Mode Project. This comprehensive 
digital platform, developed with technical support from 
NIC, enables all transport-related services through 
a 
centralized, 
web-based 
system 
that 
operates 
nationwide.	
2.5.5.2	 eTransport Ecosystem
The project integrates the entire vehicle life cycle—
including manufacturing, sales, registration, insurance, 
financing, testing and fitness, and scrapping. Data and 
services have been interconnected with stakeholders 
across allied sectors, such as vehicle manufacturers, 
dealers, banks, FASTag, eWay Bill, Smart Cities, 
Pollution Checking Centers, Fitness Centers, Driving 
Schools, GST, and police and security agencies 
(NATGRID, NCRB, CCTNS), among others. 
2.5.5.3	 Integration of e-CHALLAN with Intelligent 
Traffic Management System (ITMS)
e-Challan or electronic Challans, is a “One Nation 
One Challan” traffic enforcement solution, consisting 
of an android-based mobile app and a web interface. 
It has been developed for the purpose of providing a 
comprehensive solution for Transport Enforcement 
Officers and Traffic Policemen. The solution has digital 
interfaces for all the stakeholders in ecosystem viz. 
MoRTH, State Departments, Police, Citizen, Court, etc. 
This application is integrated with Vahan and Sarathi 
applications and provides a number of user-friendly 
features while covering all major functionalities of the 
Traffic Enforcement System. As of 31st December 2024, 
the total number of eChallans generated through the 
ITMS system stands at 4,85,14,307, and the revenue 
generated through ITMS amounts to Rs. 688,46,74,603.
2.5.5.4	 Integrated Road Accident Database (iRAD)
The iRAD (Integrated Road Accident Database) project 
of MoRTH has been envisioned to work in the direction 
of promoting and enhancing Road Safety. The project is 
being executed by NIC, in association with NICSI.
The project operates in an integrated ecosystem of 
various stakeholders – comprising data producers/ data 
consumers viz. Police, Hospitals, Ambulance Services 
(particularly the 108 ambulances), Blood Banks, Medical 
Records, State and National Transport departments, 
Insurance companies, Courts, etc. and facilitate timely 
exchange of information among them for timely and 
effective response/ support.
The project is now expanded in new areas like – a) 
Facilitating the cashless treatment of Road accident 
victims in association with TMS application of NHA, 
b) Early claim settlement of Road accident victims in 
association with eCourts application, and c) Providing 
accident data layer to PM-GatiShakti project.
2.5.5.5	 NextGen mParivahan App
NextGen mParivahan mobile app is a citizen-centric 
transport solution. It is available in both Android and 
iOS versions. It is one of the most popular Government 
applications with more than 10 Crore downloads. 
Transport services like Virtual RC/DL creation, Real time 
Insurance and PUCC validity details, online payment 
of tax, reporting of traffic violation, Citizen Sentinel etc. 
have also been incorporated in the app for state-specific 
implementation. 75 online services can be availed 
through this App.
2.5.5.6	 Sale and Purchase of Pre-Owned Vehicles 
(Dealer Authorization Certificate (DAUC))
The Dealer Authorization Certificate is issued to vehicle 
dealers in India. This certificate serves as proof that a 
dealer is authorized by the Regional Transport Office 
(RTO) to sell vehicles. 
2.5.5.7	 National Permit and All India Tourist Permit 
(AITP)
The “All India Tourist Permit” (AITP) is a permit issued 
by the Transport Authority, authorizing tourist vehicle 
operators or owners to transport tourists, either 

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
53
individually or in groups, along with their personal luggage 
throughout India, upon payment of the permit fee.
2.5.5.8	 Pollution Under Control Certificate (PUCC)
PUCC is a web application that allows Pollution Under 
Control Centres to issue PUC Certificate for any vehicle 
across the country. 
Mobile application for PUCC has also been developed. 
The Mobile Application uses GeoFencing feature, 
allowing it to be functional only within a predefined radius 
of 30-40 meters of the PUC centre.
2.5.5.9	 Registered Vehicle Scrapping Facility (RVSF) 
application.
As per GSR 653(E), Registered Vehicle Scrapping 
Facility (RVSF) application has been developed, which 
enables motor vehicle owners to easily phase out old and 
unfit vehicles that have high emissions and deteriorate 
air quality. The primary objective of this application is to 
remove polluting vehicles from running on the roads and 
subsequently lower the country’s carbon footprint.
2.5.5.10 mVahan mobile App
mVahan is designed as a convenient mobile solution 
tailored for Departmental Officers at RTOs and internal 
stakeholders such as Dealers in India. Currently available 
on the Android platform, it streamlines a range of Vahan 
Services, including automating Vehicle Inspection and 
Fitness processes. The app also facilitates seamless 
document uploads by Dealers and RTOs during 
vehicle registration, enhancing efficiency and reducing 
paperwork. Additionally, mVahan supports services 
like processing requests for Change of Address, further 
simplifying administrative tasks within the transport 
sector
2.5.5.11 Automatic Fitness Management System 
(AFMS)
The Automatic Fitness Management System (AFMS) is 
a pioneering initiative launched 2022, governed by the 
MoRTH Gazette notification GSR 652 (E), to modernize 
vehicle fit management in India. Vehicle owners can 
now book appointments for fitness check online at any 
ATS, whether within their state of anywhere else in India. 
This convenience allows them to access fitness services 
without geographical constraints, view fitness reports, 
and apply for re-tests if necessary.
2.5.5.12 Vehicle Location Tracking Device (VLTD)
The Vehicle Location Tracking Device (VLTD) application 
simplifies the approval and installation process for 
tracking devices and panic buttons in public service 
vehicles. 
2.5.5.13 Homologation
The Homologation application streamlines the process 
of obtaining Type Approval for vehicles before they enter 
the market, ensuring a smooth execution. 
2.5.6	 Inclusive Development
2.5.6.1	 Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (MGNREGA)
To ensure more transparency in the implementation of 
MGNREGA in the States/UTs, a provision for capturing of 
worker’s attendance at worksite through National Mobile 
Monitoring System (NMMS) App with geo-tagged, real-
time stamped photographs of the worker twice in a day 
has become mandatory from January 2023. This app 
operates in both online and offline modes and eliminates 
connectivity issues at village. This has also enabled 
faster processing of payments for workers. NMMS app is 
being used by Gram Rojgar Sahayak (GRS) and MATE/ 
Group Leader, responsible for capturing demand and 
submit to Panchayats in group for work allocation.
2.5.6.2	 Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM)
The Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) aims to provide every rural 
household with a regular and long-term supply of drinking 
water in adequate quantity and prescribed quality, at 
affordable service delivery charges, improving the living 
standards of rural communities. Key ICT initiatives taken 
this year include:
JJM IMIS: A comprehensive effort has been undertaken 
to authenticate over 6,38,548 rural water supply schemes. 
Information about all schemes has been verified at the 
division and state levels, and a signed, authenticated 
form (in PDF) for each scheme, is uploaded to the portal.
JJM Dashboard: A new citizen portal was launched 
by the Honorable Minister of Jal Shakti at an event in 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
54
Lucknow. This portal allows citizens to view the water 
quality status of water being supplied to their villages, 
as well as other relevant information, such as a list of 
beneficiaries receiving water from taps in their villages.
JJM WQMIS: Under the guidance of Secretary 
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation, the 
process of onboarding water testing labs from other 
departments to the JJM WQMIS has begun. Currently, 
urban labs from the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
are being integrated, and their staff have been trained to 
use WQMIS through various capacity-building sessions.
JJM Web-API Portal: The JJM Web API Portal is a 
digital platform enabling the integration of services and 
applications with the Jal Jeevan Mission’s database. 
Various APIs have been published to share JJM data as 
per departmental instructions. State user departments, 
other ministries, and institutions are utilizing this data 
seamlessly. The portal is a vital tool for integrating, 
monitoring, 
ensuring 
transparency, 
and 
providing 
analytics for efficient water supply management across 
rural India.
JJM Mobile App: A user-friendly mobile app has been 
designed, developed, and rolled out for geo-tagging 
assets of water supply schemes, including water sources, 
storage structures, treatment plants, pump houses, etc.
2.5.6.3	 Swachh Bharat Mission-Grameen (SBM-G)
SBM-G 
Dashboard 
displays 
all 
the 
monitoring 
parameters of achievement and progress related to ODF 
Plus villages (Aspiring, Rising, Model), villages having 
arrangement of solid and liquid waste management 
arrangements, visual cleanliness, SLWM assets reported 
(like community compost pits, soak pits, segregation 
sheds, HH assets etc.), community sanitary complexes 
up to village level. It also displays the state wise / district 
wise progress of relevant parameters. Also, village report 
card is visible to view the ODF Plus status of the village.
SBM Portal: Portal is updated for documents / circulars / 
guidelines / Press releases and enhanced for Swachhata 
Samachar published by SBM G on regular basis.
SBM-G MIS: Used for Data entry in relevant modules 
(declaration of ODF Plus villages, marking of Solid and 
liquid waste management arrangement, functionality 
assessment) and displays all the reports related to 
captured information in MIS through mobile apps and 
web-based modules.
2.5.7	 Consumer 
Affairs 
and 
Food 
& 
Public 
Distribution
2.5.7.1	 CONFONET
The scheme of ‘Computerization and Computer 
Networking 
of 
Consumer 
Fora 
in 
the 
country, 
(CONFONET)’ aims to digitalize the functioning of the 
Consumer Commissions at all the three tiers throughout 
the country. The registration of complaints, recording 
of court proceedings, issue of notices, generation of 
cause lists, recording of judgements, record-keeping, 
and generation of statistical reports etc. are carried out 
through Online Case Monitoring application software.
2.5.7.2	 eDaakhil (https:// edaakhil.nic.in)”
As an initiative of Department of Consumer Affairs, 
a web- based application software named “eDaakhil 
has been developed by NIC. The portal empowers the 
consumers who has any grievance w.r.t any deficiency 
in services or quality of Goods.
2.5.7.3	 Targeted Public Distribution System
The Government of India launched the scheme “End-
to-End Computerization of Targeted Public Distribution 
System (TPDS) Operations” in 2013 to modernize 
the TPDS operations and to bring transparency in the 
distribution of highly subsidized food grains across 
the country. The System is operated under the shared 
responsibility of the Central and the State Governments. 
NIC is the Technical Partner for the key initiatives and 
outcomes of TPDS.
Key Achievements
• 
Digitization of ration cards/beneficiary database for 
correct identification of beneficiaries; removal of 
bogus cards and better targeting of food subsidies.
• 
Online allocation of food grains for system-
generated allocation orders to bring transparency 
in allocation of food grains, up to the Fair Price 
Shops level.

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
55
• 
Computerization of Supply Chain Management to 
ensure timely availability of food grains at all FPSs 
for delivery to the targeted beneficiaries and to 
check leakage/diversion of food grains.
• 
Online Grievance Redressal / Toll-Free Helplines 
and Transparency Portals to introduce transparency 
and public accountability in the implementation of 
TPDS.
• 
Aadhaar seeding of about 99.8% ration cards and 
almost 97.4% beneficiaries at the national level 
have been achieved so far.
• 
Almost 5.41 (99.6%) lakh of the total 5.43 Lakh 
FPSs in the country are automated by installing 
electronic Point of Sale (ePoS) devices.
• 
About approx. 98 % average foodgrains are 
distributed 
through 
Aadhaar-authenticated 
electronic transactions on a monthly basis.
• 
RCMS applications have been integrated with 
DIGILOCKER, UMANG App, NHA – PMJAY, CSC, 
States Citizen Services Portals, etc.
2.5.7.4	 One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC)
To address various challenges such as leakages and 
diversion of food grains and create a Smart Public 
Distribution System, IM-PDS scheme was launched in 
2018. The Key components of the IMPDS scheme are 
National Portability, Deduplication, creation of Central 
Repository and Data Analytics. Starting with inter-state 
portability in just 4 States in August 2019, the ONORC 
plan has been enabled in all 36 States/UTs (across the 
country) covering around 80 Crore NFSA beneficiaries, 
i.e., almost 100% NFSA population in the country. 
2.5.7.5	 Common Registration Facility of Ration 
Cards (CRF) “Mera Ration Mera Adhikar” (https://
nfsa.gov.in)
A Web based application to enable States/UTs to collect 
data of persons desirous of registering themselves for 
inclusion under NFSA, including migrants residing in 
other states.
The Common Registration Facility of Ration Cards (CRF), 
titled “Mera Ration Mera Adhikar,” was introduced as a 
web-based application designed to empower States/
Union Territories (UTs) to collect crucial data from 
individuals seeking registration under the NFSA.
Under the framework of the NFSA 2013, NIC has been 
working towards the end-to-end computerization of NFSA 
schemes, streamlining the distribution of subsidized food 
grains across all states. This initiative encompassed 
various activities, including the real-time online Ration 
Cards Management System, FPS (Fair Price Shop) 
licensing, godown profiling, Allocation and Supply Chain 
Management of commodities, and Aadhaar-based 
distribution to beneficiaries.
2.5.7.6	 Fortification of Rice and its Distribution under 
PDS (https://annavitran.nic.in/FR/avFortifiedRice)
NIC has developed the dashboard for Rice Fortification 
which was launched by Hon’ble Minister in Dec’ 2021. 
The dashboard provides information on fortified rice 
allocation, distribution, beneficiaries, procurement of 
fortified rice by Food Corporation of India, procurement 
of fortified rice by States, details of the fortified rice 
suppliers, rice mills with blending capacity, etc. Apart from 
MIS related information, the dashboard also provides the 
various standards pertaining to rice fortification. 
2.5.7.7	 Subsidy Claims Application for NFSA (SCAN) 
(https://nfsa.gov.in)
The Hon’ble Minister of Consumer Affairs, Food, and 
Public Distribution, Shri Prahlad Joshi, inaugurated the 
Subsidy Claims Application for NFSA (SCAN Portal) 
on 05-12-2024 at Bharat Mandapam, New Delhi. This 
state-of-the-art application, designed & developed by 
the National Informatics Centre (NIC), revolutionizes 
the management and disbursement of food subsidies 
of approximately Rs. 2.8 Lac Crore under the National 
Food Security Act (NFSA) and other welfare schemes. 
The SCAN Portal ensures streamlined processing for all 
subsidy-related claims, making the system faster, more 
transparent, and highly efficient. It’s a Game-Changer 
for Public Distribution Systems for Government of India 
& State Governments. The SCAN Portal’s integration 
with the Public Financial Management System (PFMS) 
ensures automated and error-free fund disbursements 
directly to state food department accounts and FCI.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
56
2.5.8	 Law & Justice
2.5.8.1	 eGovernance Support to Supreme Court 
(https://sci.gov.in)
eGovernance Support to Supreme Court include the 
official website for citizen-litigants centric services like 
Cause List, Case status, Daily orders, Judgements, 
Vernacular Judgements, e-Copying for providing benefits 
of scalability and extensibility
The E-filing 2.0 provides ease in the business of 
electronic filing, defects notification, curing of defects, 
processing the documents for scrutiny to all the 
stakeholders, namely, Advocates-on-Record, Party-in-
Person, and the registry.
FASTER, Fast and Secure Transmission of Electronic 
Records, courts can send e-authenticated copies of bail 
orders, stay orders, interim orders, and proceedings 
through secured electronic communication to duty 
officers at prisons, for releasing prisoners expeditiously.
Work from Anywhere module called the e-office has 
shifted the day-to-day work mode of Registry away from 
paper-dependency and confines of work-station space 
besides increasing ease and speed of performance.
e-SCR (Supreme Court Reporter) system, an online 
repository of reported judgments of the Supreme Court 
made available to citizens, free of cost, at the click of a 
button.
Neutral Citation System allows decisions of the 
Supreme Court to be identified and cited through a 
unique number. 
SuSwagatam, a citizen centric, web-based, and mobile-
friendly app, facilitates visitors to the Supreme Court 
to now request an e-Pass to enter the Court premises 
rather than waiting in long and tedious queues.
An 
automatic 
transcribing 
of 
arguments 
and 
exchanges in matters before the Constitutional Benches 
by use of artificial intelligence and is available in 
respective cases on the website.
Hybrid hearing system combines the best of video 
meeting tools and conferencing technology to ensure that 
advocates and parties-in-person have the convenience 
to choose to appear either in virtual mode or physical 
mode.
2.5.8.2	 Tribunals, Regulatory Bodies and Commercial 
Courts
Online Tribunals System of NIC is an ICT enabled initiative 
towards digital transformation of processes, workflows 
followed in tribunals through process re-engineering 
and providing a configurable automated system to cater 
needs of all its direct and in-direct stakeholders.
Objectives
Dimensions
Features
 Implement decision support systems in 
Tribunals.
 e-Filing: 
Caters 
online 
filing 
of 
Petition 
/Application 
/Caveat 
by 
Litigants including requisite payments, 
document submission etc
 24×7 availability of e-filing: Anywhere, 
Anytime
 Automate the processes to provide 
transparency 
in 
accessibility 
of 
information to its stakeholders
 Case Information System (CIS): 
Covers and facilitates end to end 
electronic processing of e-filed case by 
Tribunal
 Court fee calculation, online payment 
and unique filing number generation
 Online scrutiny check and defect 
notification via email
 To enhance judicial productivity, both 
qualitatively & quantitatively, to make 
the justice delivery system affordable, 
accessible, cost effective, predictable, 
reliable and transparent
 Document 
Management 
System 
(DMS): Online repository for accessing 
documents pertaining to cases.
 Case Type based unique registration 
number 
allotment 
and 
sms/email 
notification
 E-Causelist generation and publishing, 
orders generation and publishing
 To bring tribunals on board with online 
court system under common framework 
with minimal customizations
 e-Hearing (Through VC): Facilitates 
online appearance/ hearing of Litigants 
before benches in the cases. In hybrid 
mode, litigants can present in person 
physically or Video Conferencing.
 Digitized and digitally signed case 
documents/ 
Cause 
lists/Summon/
Notice/Orders/Judgements
 Business rules based case allocation 
to different courts

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
57
2.5.8.3	 eCourts
e-Courts project has been planned by the eCommittee, 
Supreme Court of India by submitting the National Policy 
and Action Plan for Implementation of Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) in the Indian Judiciary 
– 2005. The project lays great emphasis on service 
delivery to litigants, lawyers, and other stakeholders. It 
involves the creation of improved ICT infrastructure in 
Courts, Video conferencing etc., and ensures optimum 
automation of judicial and administrative processes
2.5.8.4	 Case Information System (CIS), Application 
for Indian Judiciary (https://ecourts.gov.in)
Case Information System (CIS) is an application 
designed and developed by NIC for Indian Judiciary. It is 
implemented in High Courts and District & Subordinate 
courts of the country. Currently CIS version 3.2 & 
version 4.0 is implemented in 3,325 & 4760 District & 
Subordinate courts respectively and CIS HC Version 
1.0 is implemented in 22 High Courts in the country. 
Automated SMS and Emails are triggered to Advocate/
Litigants on case events. Single unified portal (https://
ecourts.gov.in) and eCourts services mobile app 
provides citizen centric services like case status, cause 
lists and orders/judgements to stakeholders like litigants, 
advocates, police etc.
2.5.8.5	 National Judicial Data Grid (http://njdg.
ecourts.gov.in)
National Judicial Data Grid is a consolidated nationwide 
judicial data warehouse which was set up with real 
time updates. NJDG provides statistics of pending and 
disposed cases in the country. It works as a monitoring 
tool to identify and manage the pendency of cases. 
2.5.8.6	 Virtual Courts
The concept of Virtual Courts is aimed at reducing 
footfalls in the courts by eliminating the physical presence 
of violators or advocates in the court. A virtual judge can 
preside over a Virtual Court whose jurisdiction can be 
extended to the entire state and working hours may be 
24×7. Neither litigant need to visit the court nor judge 
will have to physically preside over the court, thus saving 
precious judicial time.
2.5.8.7	 ePay (https://pay.ecourts.gov.in)
ePay is developed as a single payment gateway for the 
payment of various kinds of digital payments in the courts. 
It enables payment of court fees, judicial deposits, fine, 
penalty and other fee online through the ePay portal, 
thereby eliminating the use of stamps, cheque, and cash. 
ePay portal is integrated with 36 different State treasury 
applications like SBI ePay, GRAS, eGRAS, JeGRAS, 
Himkosh, etc. used by respective State Governments.
2.5.8.8	 eFiling (filing.ecourts.gov.in)
eFiling 3.0 system is a complete end to end solution 
developed for online filing of plaints, written statements, 
replies, and various applications related to cases. Both 
Civil and Criminal cases can be filed before any High 
Court or District Court of the country. The system is 
designed in Bilingual (English and local language) to 
reach wider group covering advocates/litigants.
2.5.8.9	 NSTEP
NSTEP provides a Centralized process service tracking 
application and a bilingual mobile app for bailiffs 
designed to reduce inordinate delays in process serving. 
New enhancement for sharing warrants/ summons with 
CCTNS application through ICJS has been introduced.
2.5.8.10 JustIS App
JustIS mobile app is provided to Judicial officers to 
monitor pendency and disposal at fingertips. It also 
includes several new features like “Briefcase” to view 
the disposal of cases during previous postings. Principal 
District Judge can monitor pendency and disposal of 
the entire district under the jurisdiction and for individual 
judges. 
2.5.8.11 Judgment Search Portal
Judgment search portal provides facility to search High 
Courts and Supreme Court judgments. Facility provided 
to search judgements on various parameters like Case 
Type, Act, Judge, Decision date etc.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
58
2.5.8.12 Digital Courts
Digital Courts, Green Initiative of Indian Judiciary, has 
been developed to make courts paperless/ digital. 
It provides a facility for Judges to view case files/ 
documents while sitting at home. Judges can view all 
the case-related pleadings, charge sheets, court orders 
etc. of both civil and criminal cases which aim at making 
the court paperless. It provides AI (Artificial Intelligence) 
based Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) facility for 
converting speech to text to generate judgements. Case 
Information System (CIS), eFiling, JustIS Mobile App 
and Interoperable Criminal Justice System (ICJS) are 
integrated with Digital Courts.
2.5.9	  Home Affairs
2.5.9.1	 Interoperable Criminal Justice System (ICJS)
Inter-Operable Criminal Justice System (ICJS)  is a 
national platform for enabling integration of the main IT 
system used for delivery of Criminal Justice in the country 
by five pillars namely: -
• 
Police (Crime and Criminal Tracking and Network 
Systems),
• 
e-Forensics for Forensic Labs,
• 
e-Courts for Courts,
• 
e-Prosecution for Public Prosecutors
• 
e-Prisons for Prisons. 
The system is being built on the principle of ‘one data 
one entry’ whereby data is entered only once in one pillar 
and the same is then available in all other pillars without 
the need to re-enter the data in each pillar. It was mainly 
intended to make the Justice delivery system speedy 
and transparent.
2.5.9.2	 National Cyber Crime Reporting Portal 
(https://cybercrime.gov.in)
This portal is an initiative of Government of India to 
facilitate victims/complainants to report cybercrime 
complaints online. It caters to complaints pertaining to 
all types of cybercrimes. Complaints reported on this 
portal are dealt by law enforcement agencies/ police 
based on the information available in the complaints. It is 
imperative to provide correct and accurate details while 
filing complaints for prompt action.
Types of Portals:
• 
National Cybercrime Reporting Portal (NCRP)– 
For citizens to report and track their Cybercrime 
complaints. 
• 
National Cyber Police Portal (NCPP)– Backend 
portal for MHA, DoT, IB, CBI, TSPs, LEAs and 
financial intermediaries to process the complaints. 
(https://cyberpolice.nic.in).
2.5.9.3	 ePrisons
ePrisons is a comprehensive application which has 
developed over time by studying the working process 
of various prisons across the country and it covers the 
entire lifecycle of the prisoner. 
This product is highly configurable as per the needs of 
the state prison department and caters not only to the 
entire lifecycle of the prisoner but also caters to various 
needs of the prison authorities. 
2.5.9.4	 Citizen Portal
ePrisons has extended the services to the Citizens, 
whose relatives are lodged inside the Jail and Prison 
authority can provide the data in digital way without 
manual intervention. 
2.5.9.5	 Private 
Security 
Agency-License 
(PSA-
License) Portal (https://psara.gov.in)
Private Security Agency-license (PSA-License) portal is 
single window Portal for new / renew of Private Security 
Agency license to run their businesses, required under 
the Private Security Agencies Regulation Act 2005 for all 
the States/ UTs of India. 
2.5.10	 Culture and Tourism
2.5.10.1 Tourism
Key ICT activities initiated by the collaborative efforts of 
NIC and Ministry of Tourism:

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
59
(i)	
Tourist Sentiment Tracker-
	
An innovative feedback mechanism through QR 
code designed to capture real-time insights from 
visitors across the country was launched in the 
month of September 2024. The Tourist Sentiment 
Tracker is a crucial step towards fostering a more 
personalized, high-quality experience for every 
visitor, ensuring that India continues to shine as a 
global tourism destination.
(ii)	
Yuva Tourism Club Portal- (https://ytc.tourism.
gov.in)
	
The YUVA Tourism Club portal was developed to 
capture details and activities of several thousand 
Yuva Tourism Clubs across the world. Members 
can register through the dedicated portal, where 
they can upload details of their various activities 
and events. 
(iii)	
Utsav Portal- (https://utsav.gov.in)
	
Utsav is a platform that showcases India’s vibrant 
events and festivals across its diverse States and 
Union Territories (UTs), including Live Darshan for 
religious observances. 
(iv)	
Incredible India 2.0- (https://incredibleindia.
gov.in)
	
The Incredible India 2.0 platform was launched on 
27th September on World Tourism Day at Vigyan 
Bhawan by the Hon’ble Vice President of India. It 
was developed to make as one of the finest tourism 
platforms in the world. Through utilizing advanced 
digital tools, this platform boosts India’s visibility 
and provides personalized content to attract a 
wide range of tourists. It is enabling improved 
engagement with travelers, making India a 
preferred destination in established and emerging 
markets.
2.5.10.2 Culture Informatics
• 
Bhartia Kriti Sampada Portal (Pandulipi Patala) 
(https://www.pandulipipatala.nic.in/)
	
National Mission on Manuscripts (NMM) aims 
to locate, document, preserve and render the 
Manuscripts, which constitute the memory and 
cultural heritage of India. It connects India’s past 
with its future. A web-based workflow application 
is developed for NMM for Bhartiya Kriti Sampada 
where lacs of manuscript data files are uploaded. 
The application is developed in collaboration with 
NICSI, National Mission on Manuscript and NIC.
2.5.11	 Labor & Employment 
2.5.11.1 National Database of Unorganized Workers 
(eShram Portal)
NIC has developed an e-Shram portal for creating 
Aadhaar authenticated comprehensive NDUW. The 
portal has details of the Unorganized workers such as 
Name, Mobile Number, Occupation, Address, Aadhaar 
seeded Bank name, Educational Qualification, Skill types 
etc. It is the first-ever national database of Unorganized 
workers. More than 30.58 Crore eShram cards have 
been issued since the launch of the portal. 
2.5.11.2 Unified Shram Suvidha Platform (USSP)
USSP portal facilitates the Ministry of Labor & Employment 
and its Labor Law Enforcement Agencies like EPFO, 
ESIC, CLC(C) and DGMS to monitor the implementation 
of Labor laws in various establishments in the central 
sphere. It facilitates the employer/establishment to file 
common registration, filing of annual returns under 8 
Labor Laws along with online common Return under 
Mines Act of DGMS. Unique Labor Identification Number 
(LIN) is allotted to each establishment registered under 
any Labor law after deduplication of data coming from 
various enforcement agencies. Till date more than 46.74 
Lakhs LIN have been issued through USSP. Nine State 
Governments are also onboarded with Shram Suvidha 
Portal. 
2.5.11.3 Platform for Effective Enforcement for No 
Child Labor (PENCiL)
PENCiL portal connects the Ministry of Labor & 
Employment with 21 States, 280 Districts Project 
Societies with 3,400 (approx.) Special Training Centers 
(STCs) for effective enforcement for “No Child Labor”. 
It sets baselines based on KPIs at the levels to monitor 
physical and financial progress reports. The platform 
captures children identified and rehabilitated through 
STCs and skill development depending on age group 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
60
and nature of industry from where the children have been 
rescued. 
2.5.11.4 SAMADHAN Portal
SAMADHAN Portal is a digital initiative of the Ministry 
of Labor and Employment, Government of India to 
make the life of workmen, management, trade union 
and other stakeholders smooth by making the system 
more user-friendly, transparent & efficient though online 
documentation, centralized monitoring & reducing 
disposal time by giving them a single online platform for 
raising their grievances. SAMADHAN portal facilitates 
workmen, trade union or management to raise an 
industrial dispute, Claims and General Complaints before 
the Conciliation Officer (CO) of the area. 
2.5.11.5 National Career Service Centre for SC/STs 
Portal
The National Career Service Centres (NCSCs) for 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (erstwhile 
NCSC) comes under Directorate General of Employment 
(DGE) which operate six courses, namely Special 
Coaching Scheme, Computer O Level Training, Computer 
Hardware Maintenance Training, Office Automation 
Accounting Publishing Assistant, Business Accounting 
Associate and Cyber Secured Web Development 
Associate. 
The portal is developed for this scheme that contains 
the process flow from filling up the application form by 
beneficiaries till the monthly stipend being disbursed 
DBT through PFMS portal based on eligibility criteria. 
2.5.12	 Power and Energy
2.5.12.1 National Power Portal (NPP) (https://npp.
gov.in)
NPP, an integrated suite of various energy applications for 
the Indian Power Sector facilitates online data capture at 
various frequencies (daily, monthly, annually). The data 
is provided by generation, transmission, and distribution 
utilities in the country through various automated 
subsystems which validate and process the collected 
data and disseminates the same through various 
analyzed reports, graphs, statistics at all India, region, 
state level for central, state, and private sector. NPP 
monitors around 62,594 urban distribution feeders, their 
power supply position, and AT&C losses and 1,31,335 
rural feeders, their power supply position. The All India 
Installed Capacity and Generation data is captured from 
around 530 stations comprising 1724 units, besides 
monthly progress of around 1320 Transmission Lines 
and 1200 Sub-Stations from 88 transmission utilities.
2.5.12.2 Non-Industry and Industry Power Survey 
(NIPS) (https://cgp.npdms.nic.in)
This system is designed and developed by NIC to 
capture and monitor detailed data on captive power plant 
capacity and generation across the country. 
2.5.12.3 Disaster Resource Inventory for Power 
Sector (DRIPS) (https://drips.npp.nic.in)
The Ministry of Power and Central Electricity Authority 
envisaged to provide an online centralized application 
to maintain inventory of power sector items for disaster 
affected areas to provide quick information on various 
power sector items available in nearby areas to restore 
electricity supply as soon as possible. An online web 
based integrated application has been developed by NIC 
for the same.
2.5.12.4 National Portal for PM – Suryaghar: Muft Bijli 
Yojna (https://pmsuryaghar.gov.in/)
National Portal for PM – Suryaghar: Muft Bijli Yojna aimed 
at installing rooftop solar plants in 1 crore households. 
The scheme was launched by Govt of India on 13.02.2024 
and subsumed the earlier scheme of Phase-II of the Grid 
connected Rooftop Solar programme. This is a role based 
portal and different stakeholders MNRE, DISCOMs, 
SNAs, SECI, PSUs, Government Agencies, Vendor, and 
Beneficiary use this portal as per their requirements. This 
portal facilitates beneficiaries for registration followed 
by submitting applications for installation, inspection, 
installation and release of subsidy. The portal is integrated 
with around 80 DISCOMs for beneficiary verification. 
As of now, approximately 1.56 crore beneficiaries had 
registered on the portal, and 33.2 lakh applications had 
been received. Subsidies have been released for 5.45 
lakh beneficiaries.

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
61
2.5.12.5 Biogas Portal (https:// biogas.mnre.gov.in)
The Ministry of New & Renewable Energy (MNRE) 
launched Biogas and BioUrja portals under the Umbrella 
scheme of the National Bioenergy Programme for the 
duration of FY 2021-22 to 2025-26 (Phase-I). Biogas 
Portal is a central platform for beneficiaries to install 
small and medium biogas plants ranging from 1 cubic 
meter to 2,500 cubic meter. 
2.5.12.6 BioUrja Portal (https:// biourja.mnre.gov.in)
BioUrja Portal is an online platform developed to assist 
project developers in submitting applications for plant 
installation and commissioning of Biomass and Waste to 
Energy. 
2.5.12.7 Akshay Urja Portal (https://akshayurja.gov.
in/)
The Akshay Urja Portal, serves as a comprehensive 
centralized system for renewable sector which facilitate 
monthly data capture (solar, wind, hydro, bio) from various 
sources of the ministry and it disseminate renewable 
energy information (capacity, potential, generation) 
through interactive map of India which enhances data 
visualization, promotes transparency and informed 
decision-making using various data analyzed reports, 
graphs, and statistics at all India, region, and state level.
2.5.13	 Good Governance & Enforcement
2.5.13.1 IVFRT: Immigration, Visa, and Foreigners 
Registration & Tracking
The Ministry of Home has embarked on a Mission Mode 
Project known as Immigration, Visa, and Foreigners 
Registration & Tracking (IVFRT). Its primary goal is to 
create and put into action a secure and unified service 
delivery system that streamlines the entry process for 
genuine travelers while enhancing security measures. 
2.5.13.2 
Indian 
Citizenship 
Portal 
(https://
indiancitizenshiponline.gov.in)
An online application portal for Indian Citizenship, based 
on established rules, has been created for foreign 
individuals.
The process of renunciation of Indian Citizenship is 
entirely digital, devoid of cash transactions, and operates 
without direct face-to-face interactions, aligning with 
the Indian Citizenship Act. The application system has 
also been linked to the IVFRT database, facilitating the 
retrieval of data regarding Indian citizens who have 
renounced their citizenship.
2.5.13.3 e-Visa
e-Visa scheme facilitates international travelers in 
seeking Indian Visa on short notice for business visits, 
medical patients, and tourists. 
2.5.13.4 National eVidhan Application (NeVA) (http://
neva.gov.in)
NeVA aims to bring all the legislatures of the country 
together, in one platform thereby creating a massive 
data repository without having the complexity of multiple 
applications. The objective of National e-Vidhan 
Application is electronic flow of information, electronic 
laying of documents on the Table of the House 
and electronic information exchange among all the 
stakeholders to create a paperless legislature in the 
country. 
2.5.13.5 Digital Sansad (https://www.sansad.in/)
Digital Sansad (Temple of Democracy at a click) Project 
for Parliament is an integrated platform for all stakeholders 
including Members of Parliament, Citizens, Lok Sabha 
Secretariat and Government Ministries/ Departments. It 
aims to provide various online facilities in a collaborative 
and transparent manner through integrated technology 
platforms to all stakeholders. 
2.5.13.6 Service Plus
ServicePlus continues to evolve as a robust and 
scalable platform, enabling government departments 
to seamlessly deliver citizen-centric services across 
various sectors. By leveraging its Low Code-No Code 
architecture, ServicePlus ensures that even departments 
with limited technical capabilities can configure and 
deploy services with minimal effort. Additionally, 
ServicePlus places a strong emphasis on interoperability 
and scalability, accommodating the growing demand for 
digital public services while maintaining a user-friendly 
interface. ServicePlus has 3,548 services operational and 
has successfully processed over 344 crore applications, 
showcasing its significant impact and scalability.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
62
2.5.13.7 Aadhaar Authentication Services
NIC is providing Aadhaar Authentication Services to 
various eGovernance projects. These services are 
utilized by more than 122 Digital India projects, such as 
Biometric Attendance System, Digi-Locker, Ayushman 
Bharat, PDS for 24 states and 5 UTs, MSME, PM 
KISAN, MGNREGA, Scholarship, Jeevan Pramaan, 
Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana (PMAY), National Urban 
Livelihood Mission, Goods Service Tax Network (GSTN), 
Dept of School Education etc. Aadhaar Authentication 
Services offers online and real-time services including 
Authentication, e-KYC, OTP, and tokenization.
2.5.13.8 Aadhaar Data Vault Services
NIC has set up a centralized facility for storing Aadhaar 
numbers in a secure dedicated storage. The Aadhaar 
numbers are encrypted using keys specifically created 
for the purpose. The keys are created and stored in 
intrusion resistant FIPS 140-2 Level 3 HSM devices. 
Aadhaar Data Vault is the enabler for applications like 
PFMS, PM KISAN, MGNREGA, NTAJEE, National 
Scholarship Portal, Jeevan Pramaan, and many more for 
storing Aadhaar numbers of beneficiaries under various 
government schemes as per UIDAI guidelines.
2.5.13.9 Aadhaar Enabled Biometric Attendance 
System (AEBAS) (https://attendance.gov.in)
Aadhaar Enabled Biometric Attendance System (AEBAS) 
application was created for all Central / State Government 
employees who are registered on the attendance portal 
to mark their attendance. 
Currently, AEBAS System has more than 28,000 
organisations with over 24 lakh transactions on daily 
basis.
2.5.13.10 E-Sign Gateway
NIC E-Sign Data Management Service Division had 
been managing the E-Sign Gateway for enabling NIC 
supported applications to consume E-Sign services 
of C-DAC. As on date a total of over 369 applications 
including NIC, eFile, SPARROW, eOffice, DBT, PM 
Kisan, ePrisons, CVC, CIC, DBT Fertilizers, MoEF, 
Cabinet Secretariat, several state governments and 
many others are using the service.
2.5.13.11 Jeevan Pramaan (https://jeevanpramaan.
gov.in/)
Jeevan Pramaan is a digital service that allows 
pensioners to submit their life certificates through 
a biometric verification process. This service is 
available for pensioners of the Central Government, 
State Governments, and various other government 
organizations.
Jeevan Pramaan enables pensioners to submit a life 
certificate from anywhere, anytime, even from home. 
Aadhaar based biometric authentication is being used 
to ensure the aliveness of the pensioner. To further 
ease the way of submission of Jeevan Pramaan, Face 
Authentication based Life Certificate application has 
been launched on 29th Nov 2021. Face Authentication 
App eliminates the need of biometric devices and hence 
makes it easier to generate life certificates from home 
using just an android smartphone. 
As of now, 206 sanctioning authorities and 201 disbursing 
agencies have been integrated with the Jeevan 
Pramaan platform. These include various entities such 
as central and state governments, banks, Public Sector 
Undertakings (PSUs), and autonomous bodies. In 2023-
24 more than 1.51 Crore DLCs have been generated.
2.5.13.12 Smart Card Technology Division (https://
kms.parivahan.gov.in/DLSmartCardWeb/home; 
https://kms.parivahan.gov.in/rcsmartcardweb/home)
Web-Key Management System (KMS) for Issuance of 
Smart Card Based Driving License (DL)/Registration 
Certificate (RC) 
As an e-governance initiative, Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways initiated the project of computerization of 
all RTOs and issuance of Smart card-based DL and RC. 
The application adheres to national standards based 
on ISO 7816, utilizing SCOSTA (Smart Card Operating 
System for Transport Application) o/s.

Digital India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
63
2.5.13.13 RTI Online Portal
The RTI Online web portal, initiated by the Department 
of Personnel and Training and developed by NIC-
DoPT, allows citizens to submit RTI requests and 
appeals online. Launched for Central Government 
Ministries/ Departments in August 2013, it facilitates 
online registration by citizens and NRIs, with integrated 
payment gateways. The portal has been extended to 
subordinate organizations, attached offices, PSUs, 
and State Governments, including Maharashtra, Delhi, 
Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, and Ladakh UT. The system 
provides bilingual support, enables online payment of 
RTI fees, generates unique registration numbers, and 
allows citizens to track the status of their requests and 
appeals. 
2.5.13.14 SNMS (Summons and Notices Management 
System)
SNMS (Summons and Notices Management System) is 
a collaborative effort between NIC and domain experts 
from Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO). Designed 
to effectively manage cases handled by different 
Investigation Units and the issuance of summons/
notices. The system, aligned with SFIO’s workflow, 
facilitates the generation of investigation orders and 
captures information related to cases, companies, and 
individuals. through user-friendly interfaces.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Digital India
Annual
2024-2025
64

CHAPTER
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
65
Electronics industry is the world’s largest and fastest 
growing industry and is increasingly finding applications 
in all sectors of the economy. The Government attaches 
high priority to electronics hardware manufacturing and it 
is one of the important pillars of both “Make in India” and 
“Digital India” programmes of Government of India. The 
intent of the Government is to provide a level playing 
field for the domestic manufacturers, enabling them to 
compete with imports in the sector by rationalizing tariff 
structure, simplifying procedures, providing incentives 
and upgrading infrastructure. 
3.1	
National Policy on Electronics 2019
The National Policy on Electronics 2019 (NPE-2019) 
notified on 25.02.2019 envisions to position India as a 
global hub for Electronics System Design and Manufac-
turing (ESDM) by encouraging and driving capabilities in 
the country for developing core components, including 
chipsets, and creating an enabling environment for the 
industry to compete globally. The implementation of the 
schemes and initiatives under the aegis of NPE 2019 is 
expected to generate employment for about 10 million 
(1 crore) persons (Direct and Indirect) at various levels.
NPE-2019 has been formulated to reflect the new 
aspirations, requirements and realities of the electronics 
manufacturing sector in the country and the emerging 
international dynamics. The aim of NPE-2019 is as 
follows-
• 
The NPE-2019 is focused on promoting an eco-
system of manufacturing (group of industries), 
which forms supply chain of a product against the 
previous policy, which emphasis on promoting 
individual industries. The NPE-2019 aims to 
increase domestic value addition by leveraging 
potential of both domestic demand and export, 
with the goal of making India, a global hub 
for electronics manufacturing. The policy also 
promotes generation of intellectual property in 
India and deepening of the domestic research, 
development and designing capabilities.
• 
NPE-2019 also envisages intervention in emerging 
sectors of electronics like IoT, 5G equipment, 
sensors, drones, additive manufacturing (3D 
printers), robotics etc. and promotes their R&D 
and manufacturing. Among the sectors, Medical 
Electronics, Strategic Electronics, Auto & Power 
electronics have been especially identified as 
thrust areas for promoting manufacturing in India. 
• 
The introduction of concept of trusted value chain in 
electronics will help in addressing concerns related 
to cyber bugs and data thefts from our equipment. 
There is also focus on skilling, re-skilling and 
employment generation.
• 
To provide the supportive environment, NPE-2019 
envisages extending the Phased Manufacturing 
Programme (PMP) to products other than mobile 
phones, maintain a progressive duty regime and 
incentivize industry to compensate for disabilities as 
compared to other manufacturing economies. The 
NPE-2019 will also enable India to take advantage 
of the global shifts in electronics manufacturing 
locations.
• 
NPE-2019 has ushered in a slew of new incentive 
schemes. Prominent among these are Production 
Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Large Scale 
Electronics Manufacturing
Make in India
3

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Make in India
Annual
2024-2025
66
Electronics Manufacturing, Scheme for Promotion 
of manufacturing of Electronic Components 
and Semiconductors (SPECS) and Electronics 
Manufacturing Clusters (EMC 2.0) Scheme.
3.2	
Growth of Electronics Sector
Indian electronic manufacturing industry has undergone 
major transformation in the last couple of years with the 
host of initiatives and reforms. The government has taken 
several initiatives to promote electronics manufacturing 
and as a result, the domestic production of electronic 
goods has increased substantially from INR 5.54 lakh 
crore (~USD 76 Bn) in FY 2020-21 to INR 9.52 lakh crore 
in FY 2023-24 (~USD 115 Bn), growing at a Compound 
Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 19.78%. The key drivers 
of growth are the large domestic market, and availability 
of skilled talent and low-cost labour.
Production, Imports and Exports
The production, imports and exports of electronic goods 
for previous 3 years are presented below:
(Values in ` crore)
2021-22
2022-23
2023-24
Production*
6,40,810
8,25,000
9,52,000
Imports**
5,49,713
6,20,752
7,27,664
Exports**
1,16,895
1,89,934
2,41,157
*Source: MeitY Annual Report, Industry Association for 
FY2023-24
**Source: Directorate General of Commercial Intelligence and 
Statistics (DGCI&S)
•CAGR for Production from FY21-22 to FY23-24: 21.89%
•CAGR for Imports from FY21-22 to FY23-24: 15.05%
•CAGR for Exports from FY21-22 to FY23-24: 43.63%
Electronics manufacturing sector has several verticals 
in terms of its constituents. The production profile of the 
electronics sector for FY 2022-23 and FY 2023-24, based 
on the information provided by Industry Associations is 
as follows:
Product Segment 
FY22-23 
(USD 
Bn)
FY22-
23 (INR 
Crore)
FY23-24 
(USD 
Bn)
FY23-
24 (INR 
Crore)
Mobile Phones
44
3,50,000
51
4,22,000
IT Hardware 
(Laptops, Tablets)
4.5
37,291
5
41,395
Consumer 
Electronics 
(TV, Audio, 
Accessories)
12
99,442
13
1,07,627
Strategic 
Electronics
4.75
39,363
5.5
45,534
Industrial 
Electronics
12
99,442
12.5
1,03,487
Wearables & 
Hearables
1.25
10,359
2.5
20,697
Auto Electronics
7.5
62,151
8
66,378
LED Lighting
3
24,861
3.5
28,976
Telecom 
Equipment
2
16,574
3.5
28,976
Electronic 
Components
10
82,868
10.5
86,929
Electronics 
Manufacturing
101
8,22,350
115
9,52,000
Source: Industry Associations
Note: Medical Equipment and other Equipment having 
electronic content have not been taken into consideration.
As per DGCI&S data, import of electronic goods has 
increased from ` 6,20,752 crore in FY 2022-23 to ` 
727,664 crore in FY 2023-24. It is seen that the growth 
rate of imports of finished goods have declined and 
that of electronic components have grown up indicating 
the need to set up of manufacturing units of electronic 
components in the country.
As per the data provided by DGCI&S, the export of 
electronic goods has increased from ` 1,89,934 crore 
in FY 2022-23 to ` 2,41,157 crore in FY 2023-24. The 
government has taken several measures for the growth 
of the exports of electronics hardware sector.  Special 
Economic Zones (SEZs) are set up to enable hassle-
free manufacturing and trading for export purposes and 
EHTP units are the major contributors to exports. 

Make in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
67
a.	
Mobile Phones: India has emerged as the 
2nd largest manufacturer of mobile handsets in 
the world in volume terms. Over 260 units are 
manufacturing cellular mobile phones and parts/ 
components thereof in the country. Production of 
mobile phones stood at INR 4.22 lakh crore (~USD 
51 billion) in FY23-24 as per industry association 
reports. The export of mobile phones stands at 
approx. INR 1.29 lakh crore (~USD 16 Bn) for FY 
2023-24. 
	
MeitY had introduced the Phased Manufacturing 
Programme (PMP) for cellular mobile handsets 
and related sub-assemblies/ parts manufacturing 
with the objective of progressively increasing the 
domestic value addition for establishment of a 
robust cellular mobile handsets manufacturing eco-
system. As a result of implementation of the PMP 
and other Schemes/ Programmes of Government 
of India, now almost entire demand of cellular 
mobile handsets is being met from domestic 
manufacturing. 
b.	
Information & Communication Technology (ICT) 
Hardware: The first application of electronics was 
in the domain of communication and computing. 
With the emergence of integrated circuit, the world 
saw the advent of the digital computer era, and with 
the advent of microprocessor in the 1970’s, the 
world saw an exponential growth of the Information 
and Communication Technology (ICT) industry. 
Its strategic importance is such that countries 
across the world have declared it as an essential 
commodity. With its pool of technical manpower 
and proven capability as a design center for most 
of the global hardware companies, the country 
is ready to become an end-to-end player and 
global leader in the ICT hardware design and 
manufacturing space. 
	
India has a huge opportunity arising from both 
import substitution and export-led manufacturing 
in the space of ICT hardware. In addition, ICT 
hardware holds the promise of high value addition 
in India, with the manufacturing of the Components 
(i.e., Sub-Assemblies of ICT Products), Product 
design and Semiconductor Design being done in 
the country.
	
Emerging domains of AI, ML, IOT are becoming 
the new driving forces behind the growth of ICT 
hardware segment. These domains require the 
design of specialized Semiconductors, Sensors 
and Servers for which India has the capability. 
Another emerging domain in ICT hardware is the 
Large-Scale Data Centres. India with its technical 
prowess, cheap labour, large pool of manpower, 
and English as the working language, has the 
opportunity to lead the world in all these domains.
c.	
Electronic Components: The global market 
for electronic components is expected to grow. 
Following this global trend, the Indian electronic 
components market is also poised to grow 
significantly. Mobile Phones, Consumer Electronics 
and Industrial Electronics account for the major 
demand (82%) for electronic components in India. 
	
GoI launched the Scheme for Promotion of 
Manufacturing of Electronic Components and 
Semiconductors (SPECS) (notified vide Gazette 
Notification No.CG-DL-E-01042020-218992 dated 
April 01, 2020). This scheme provides financial 
incentive of 25% on capital expenditure for the 
identified list of electronic goods that comprise 
downstream value chain of electronic products, i.e., 
electronic components, ATMP units, specialized 
sub-assemblies and capital goods for manufacture 
of aforesaid goods. Apart from SPECS, the other 
policies of Government that boost the production 
of electronic components include rationalization of 
tariff structure, Phased Manufacturing Programme 
(PMP), and notification of electronics products 
under the Public Procurement (Preference to Make 
in India), Order 2017. Under the umbrella of “Make 
in India” program, Basic Customs Duty (BCD) has 
been imposed on Printed Circuit Board (PCB) 
Assembly of Mobile handsets with the intention to 
strengthen the domestic Electronics Manufacturing 
Services (EMS) and components segment in 
India. Production Linked Incentive Scheme (PLI) 
for Large Scale Electronics Manufacturing is also 
supporting manufacturing of specified electronic 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Make in India
Annual
2024-2025
68
components. The Indian government has imposed 
an anti-dumping duty (ADD) on bare printed circuit 
boards (PCBs) with fewer than six layers.
	
The Electronics Manufacturing Services industry in 
India is growing rapidly and key global players as 
well as a number of domestic companies are oper-
ational in the country. A strong component manu-
facturing base is essential for a sustainable Elec-
tronics System Design and Manufacturing (ESDM) 
ecosystem in India. This segment needs very high 
efficiency of operations to stay profitable. Availabil-
ity of components and an effective supply chain is 
vital for EMS companies for their growth.
	
India’s 
electronics 
sector 
has 
experienced 
substantial growth in manufacturing and has 
achieved considerable scale in assembly, largely 
driven by strategic government initiatives. It is 
high time to develop an ecosystem focused on 
component manufacturing to further this growth 
and enhance global competitiveness. In this 
regard, the Government is planning initiatives to 
develop a component manufacturing ecosystem.
d.	
Consumer Electronics: Consumer electronics 
refers to any device containing an electronic circuit 
board  that is intended for everyday use by 
individuals for the purpose of entertainment, 
recreation or communication. This encompasses 
a massive category of electronic products which 
includes  televisions, cameras, digital cameras, 
PDAs,  calculators, VCRs,  DVDs, clocks, audio 
devices, headphones, and many other home 
product. Key drivers for this market’s growth are 
growing awareness, easier access, changing 
lifestyle, higher disposable income and reduction 
in the per unit prices. 
	
Television is an important device in the home 
consumer electronics and has been identified as 
one product for which India can become the global 
hub for manufacturing. As per FICCI, India’s TV 
production stood at USD 4.24 billion in 2020-21 
and is expected to reach USD 10.22 billion by 
2025-26 with a CAGR of 20%. 
	
Some of the initiatives taken by the government are 
imposing the BCD on several consumer electronic 
goods to encourage companies to substitute 
imported goods with domestically manufactured 
goods; permitting 100% FDI in the consumer 
electronics manufacturing sector via the direct route 
and providing Capex subsidy under the Modified 
Special Incentive Package Scheme (M-SIPS), etc. 
Due to these efforts, foreign companies have been 
encouraged to set up manufacturing facilities for 
consumer electronics without a joint venture or 
other form of partnership with a domestic entity. In 
distributing consumer electronic goods to their end 
users, a local partner is both legally and practically 
required.
e.	
Industrial Electronics: Industrial electronics can be 
classified based on segments viz Power Electronics, 
DC/ AC converters, Material handling and 
Industrial Robots. The key application segments of 
the  industrial electronics industry are process 
control equipment, test and measuring equipment, 
power electronics equipment, automation and 
analytical instruments.  These technologies are 
gaining ground as modernization, automation 
and robotics play an important role in the modern 
industry. The industrial electronics sector is 
witnessing growth due to enhanced digitization and 
robotics applications in Industry 4.0. Additionally, 
the impetus on Smart Cities and IoT will bring 
a whole new focus and demand on smart and 
automation electronics.
	
Increasing focus on the use of renewable power 
sources across the globe, growing adoption 
of power electronics in the manufacturing of 
electric vehicles, and increasing use of power 
electronics in consumer electronics are the major 
growth drivers for the power electronics market. 
Power electronics space in India is dominated by 
unorganized regional players, which is expected to 
grow at higher rate due to huge demand and low 
penetration. Inverters and UPS are also becoming 
household items driving the growth of this segment. 
Some of the Indian players have set up global tie-
ups over the last few years and have brought in 
newer technologies into the Indian industry. Solar 
Photovoltaic and allied equipment is another 
segment which is likely to grow at a sustained high 

Make in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
69
growth rate. 
	
Industrial electronics is an empirical barometer 
of overall growth in the contribution of the 
manufacturing sector in the economy. The 
spurt in investments due to the “Make in India” 
programme is bringing significant interest in 
engineering, electrical, automotive and electronics 
segments which are the driving force behind the 
growth of  industrial electronics  sector. In future, 
M2M (machine-to-machine and machine-to-man) 
communication modules driven by Industry 4.0 
activities will drive the growth of the Industrial 
electronic segment.
f.	
Automotive Electronics: Automotive electronics 
are electrically operated systems integrated and 
mounted in several vehicle applications such as 
body electronics, safety systems, and infotainment. 
The automotive market demand is experiencing 
trends related to advanced mobility solutions, 
powertrain & vehicle system electrification, and 
advanced safety systems. Due to the increased 
implementation of these systems in vehicles, 
the penetration of automotive electronics has 
also increased, further creating the demand for 
automotive electronics products across the globe. 
The digitization of automotive systems by including 
connected technologies, in-vehicle communication, 
and ADAS & automated systems have created 
several opportunities for market growth. The 
growing integration & adoption of automotive 
electronics in modern vehicles to deliver enhanced 
safety & comfort to consumers is one of the 
major factors driving the automotive electronics 
industry growth. Several features offered by 
OEMs including Automated Emergency Braking 
(AEB) system, airbag system, and lane departure 
warning, etc. have significantly decreased road 
accidents worldwide. Automotive electronics along 
with the presence of broad computing technologies 
and connected features are enhancing automobile 
capabilities. Alcohol ignition interlock, accident 
data recorder system, and emergency call system 
are some of the features gaining attraction, which 
will further propel the growth. According to Allied 
Market Research, the global Auto electronics 
market is estimated to reach USD 382.16 billion by 
2026, growing at a CAGR of 7.3 percent from 2019 
to 2026.
	
Automotive Mission Plan 2016-26 targets India to 
be among the top three in the world for engineering, 
manufacturing and export of vehicles and auto 
components. The growing presence of global 
automobile Original Equipment Manufacturers 
(OEMs) in the Indian manufacturing landscape 
has significantly increased the localization of their 
components in the country. India has become 
the preferred designing and manufacturing base 
for most global auto OEMs for local sourcing 
and exports. 
g.	
Strategic Electronics: The strategic electronics 
segment consists of Military Communication sys-
tems, Radars and Sonars, Network Centric sys-
tems, Electronic Warfare systems, Weapon sys-
tems, Satellite based Communication, Navigation 
and Surveillance systems, Navigational aids, Un-
derwater electronic systems, Infra-Red (IR) based 
detection and ranging system, Disaster manage-
ment system, Internal security systems, etc.
	
India has the second largest armed force in the 
world, and is considered the seventh largest 
aerospace and defence (A&D) market globally 
with a sizeable budget to cover the needs of the 
country’s Army, Navy and Air Force. The large-
scale modernization of the defence forces and 
the drive to manufacture local have become focus 
areas of the government. Emerging technologies 
are going to reshape modern day warfare, and will 
harness the power of electronics to do so. This will 
make the Indian strategic electronics (SE) sector, 
mainly comprising aerospace and defence, a 
vibrant industry over the next decade.
	
The next decade is likely to see exponential 
growth in combat systems as well as non-platform-
based programmes, facilitating smart battalions. 
Therefore, there are opportunities for electronics 
manufacturing in India in both standalone systems 
(as part of platforms) as well as at a sub-system 
level. Key factors that will influence growth are:
	
• 
The modernization of weapon platforms

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Make in India
Annual
2024-2025
70
	
• 
The induction of state-of-art weapons by the 
armed forces
	
• 
The impact of indigenization and the Make in 
India programme
h.	
Medical Electronics: Indian medical devices mar-
ket is among the top twenty in the world by mar-
ket size, and fourth in Asia after Japan, China and 
South Korea. The Government has taken various 
regulatory steps to promote this sector and has 
created excellent opportunities for the domestic 
manufacturers, thereby reducing the dependence 
on imports. Medical devices industry in the country 
is dominated by multinationals that controls about 
75-80 per cent of the Indian market. Further, more 
than 80 percent of domestic manufacturers are in 
the small-scale sector and have a turnover of less 
than ` 10 crore. Also, more than 6,000 types of 
medical devices are in use worldwide, but India 
manufacturers are just one-sixth of these medical 
devices.
3.3	
Schemes and programs
1.	
Modified Special Incentive Package Scheme 
(M-SIPS):
	
In order to promote large scale manufacturing in 
the country, a Modified Special Incentive Package 
Scheme (M-SIPS) was announced by the Govern-
ment in July 2012. The Scheme has been amend-
ed twice – in August, 2015 and in January, 2017. 
The Scheme has been closed on 31st December, 
2018 to receive new applications. The salient fea-
tures of the Scheme are: 
 
• 
Provides Capital Subsidy - 20% for invest-
ments in Special Economic Zones (SEZs) 
and 25% in non-SEZs.
 
• 
Provides incentives for both new units and 
expansion units.
 
• 
Provides incentives for a period of 5 years 
from the date of approval of application.
 
• 
Provides incentives for 44 categories/verti-
cals across the value chain (raw materials 
including assembly, testing, packaging and 
accessories, chips, components).
 
• 
Minimum investment threshold for each 
product category/vertical.
 
• 
Unit to be in Industrial Area notified by Cen-
tral/State Govt.
	
Status of M-SIPS till December, 2024 is as 
follows:
	
As on 31st December, 2024, 316 applications with 
proposed investment of ` 82,247 Crore are under 
consideration. Out of these, 316 applications, 315 
applications with proposed investment of approxi-
mately ` 80,238 Crore have been approved, 1 ap-
plication with proposed investment of ` 2,009 crore 
is under appraisal.
	
The incentives to the tune of ` 2558.12 Crore have 
been disbursed to the 145 applicants.

Make in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
71
	
Out of 315 approved applicants, 293 applicants 
have started incurring investment on their projects 
and have made investment of ` 45,249 Crore. 275 
applicants have commenced commercial production 
with reported turnover of ` 13,58,036 Crore, which 
includes exports to the tune of ` 3,16,413 Crore. 
These units have given employment opportunities 
(Direct & Indirect) to over 4,81,043 persons and 
given revenue of approximately ` 1,81,015 Crore 
to the Government. 
2.	
Electronic 
Cluster 
Manufacturing 
(EMC) 
Schemes
	
To create conducive and sustainable ecosystem 
for electronics manufacturing in the country, Gov-
ernment notified the Electronics Manufacturing 
Cluster (EMC) Scheme in October, 2012 for pro-
viding support to create world-class infrastructure 
along with common facilities and amenities for 
attracting investments in the ESDM sector. The 
scheme was open to receive applications for a 
period of five years from the date of its notifica-
tion i.e., upto October, 2017. Further period upto 
March 2026 is available for disbursement of funds 
to the approved projects. The salient features of 
the scheme are as follows:
	
i)  	
To create robust infrastructure base for elec-
tronics manufacturing in the country through 
development of Greenfield EMCs and Com-
mon Facility Centres (CFCs).
	
ii)  	
Financial assistance upto 50% of the pro-
ject cost subject to a ceiling of ` 50 crore for 
every 100 acres of land for Greenfield EMC 
and 75% of the cost of infrastructure, subject 
to a ceiling of ` 50 crore for Common Facility 
Centre.
	
iii) 	
State Government incentives are over and 
above the Central financial assistance. 
	
iv) 	
Development of EMCs to provide ready in-
frastructure for industry engaged in electron-
ics verticals and its entire value chain to set 
up their manufacturing facilities in EMC.
	
Status of EMC till December, 2024 is as follows:
	
Under the scheme, MeitY received 50 applications 
out of which 46 applications were for setting up of 
Greenfield EMCs and 4 applications for setting up 
of Common Facility Centers (CFC) in Brownfield 
Clusters from 19 states across the country. Of 
these, nineteen (19) Greenfield EMCs and Three 
(3) CFCs were accorded approval admeasuring 
an area of 3,464 acres with project cost of ` 3,499 
crore including Grant-in-aid of ` 1,470 crore from 
Government of India. These EMCs were poised 
to attract an investment of ` 46,619 crore and 
are expected to generate 6.30 lakh employment 
opportunities once operational. 
	
As on December 2024, a Grant-in-aid amounting to ` 
845.38 crore has been released for implementation 
of these projects. These EMCs/CFCs are providing 
developed infrastructure with plug & play facility 
along with requisite testing/validation services to 
electronics industry to start their production activity 
in the country. About 390 companies with projected 
investment of ` 54,546 crore have committed 
for setting up of their manufacturing facilities 
within these EMCs with estimated employment 
generation of about 2.69 Lakh. Of these, 140 
companies started their commercial production 
with an investment of ` 19,743 crores and provided 
employment opportunities to over 70,242 persons. 
Another 113 electronics manufacturing units are at 
various stages of construction and implementation. 
3.	
Modified Electronics Manufacturing Clusters 
(EMC 2.0) Scheme
	
To provide avenues for expanding and strengthen-
ing of electronics manufacturing ecosystem in the 
country; Ministry of Electronics and IT notified the 
Modified Electronics Manufacturing Clusters (EMC 
2.0) Scheme on April 01, 2020. By providing sup-
port for creation of world class infrastructure along 
with common facilities and amenities for attracting 
major global electronics manufacturers along with 
their supply chains, the scheme aims to make India 
an Electronics Manufacturing Hub. The scheme 
also provides requisite financial assistance for 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Make in India
Annual
2024-2025
72
creation of industry specific facilities like Common 
Facility Centers, Ready Built Factory Sheds / Plug 
and Play facilities etc. This will attract large scale 
electronics manufacturers to commence their pro-
duction in the country and act as Anchor units to 
bring their suppliers in such clusters. It will also 
ensure greater integration with the global supply 
chains in the electronics manufacturing sector. The 
salient features of EMC 2.0 Scheme are as follows:
	
i)	
Financial assistance upto 50% of the project 
cost subject to ceiling of ` 70 crore per 100 
acres of land for setting up of Electronics 
Manufacturing Cluster projects and 75% of 
the project cost subject to a ceiling of ` 75 
crore for Common Facility Centres (CFCs). 
	
ii)	
Minimum land area requirement is 200 acres 
(100 acres in case of North-Eastern States, 
Hill States and UTs).
	
iii)	
Commitment from Anchor Units for having 
min. 20% of saleable/ leasable area with in-
vestment Commitment of ` 300 crore (10% 
and ` 150 crore in case of North-Eastern 
States, Hill States and UTs)
	
iv)	
Development of Ready Built Factory (RBF) 
Sheds and Plug & Play facilities in at least 
10% of the saleable / leasable land area.
	
v)	
Open for new as well as expansion of exist-
ing EMCs/CFCs. 
	
vi)	
Implementation and execution of scheme 
through Project Management Agency i.e., 
STPI. 
	
vii)	
State Government/its agencies, Central 
PSUs/State PSUs, Industrial Corridor Devel-
opment Corporations (ICDCs) or joint ven-
ture of such agencies with Anchor units or 
industrial park developers (existing SPVs in 
case of expansion of projects) all eligible to 
apply
	
viii)	
Scheme is open for receipt of application for 
a period upto March, 2024 and period upto 
March, 2028 is available for release of finan-
cial assistance to approved projects.
	
Status of EMC 2.0 till December 2024, is as 
follows:
	
Under the Scheme, 8 applications for setting up 
of EMC and 1 application for setting up of CFC 
ESDM Landscape (Key Clusters/Hubs)

Make in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
73
admeasuring an area of 2,689 acres with a project 
cost of ` 3539.56 crore including Central financial 
assistance of ` 1692.51 crore have been approved. 
These EMCs are poised to attract an investment 
of ` 40,919 crore and have potential to generate 
about 1.63 lakh employment opportunities once 
fully operational. Financial assistance of ` 262.35 
crore has been released so far. An investment 
commitment of ` 30,799 crore has already been 
received from 60 companies with employment 
potential of 53,144 persons in these EMCs. 4 units 
have already started production and other 4 units 
are in construction. An investment of ` 8,571 crores 
has been mobilized with employment generation of 
8,057 persons. 
4.	
Electronics Development Fund (EDF)
	
Electronics Design & Manufacturing is a sector 
which is characterized by high velocity of 
technological change. Setting up of EDF was one 
of the important strategies to enable creation of 
an electronics industry ecosystem in the country. 
Encouraging a vibrant ecosystem of innovation, 
Research and Development (R&D) with active 
industry involvement is essential for a thriving 
electronics industry. It is with this objective that 
an Electronics Development Fund (EDF) has 
been set up as a “Fund of Funds” to participate in 
professionally managed “Daughter Funds” which in 
turn provides risk capital to companies developing 
new technologies in the area of Electronics and 
Information Technology (IT). This fund is expected 
to foster R&D and innovation in these technology 
sectors through creation of an ecosystem for 
providing risk capital to industry to undertake 
market driven R&D. It will, in the process, enrich 
the intellectual property in the country and 
encourage more entrepreneurs towards product 
and technology development.
	
Canbank Venture Capital Funds Ltd. (CVCFL), a 
100% subsidiary of Canara Bank, is the Investment 
Manager and MeitY is the anchor investor of 
EDF. EDF has drawn Rs 216.33 crore from its 
contributors, which includes Rs 210.33 crore from 
MeitY. As on 31.12.2024, EDF has invested Rs 
257.58 crore in eight Daughter Funds, which in turn 
have made investments of 1335.26 crore in 128 
Ventures/ Startups. Total employment in supported 
Startups was more than 22600. The number of 
IPs created/ acquired by the supported start-ups 
is 360. Out of the 128 startups, Daughter Funds 
have exited from 35 investments and written off 
13 investments. The cumulative returns received 
in EDF from the proceedings of these (including 
partial exits) is Rs 125.41 crore. The supported 
start-ups and companies are majorly working in 
IOT, Robotics, Drones, Autonomous Cars, Health-
tech, Cyber security, Artificial Intelligence / Machine 
Learning etc.
S. 
No.
Name of 
Daughter 
Fund
Amount 
invested 
by EDF 
Daughter 
Fund 
Investment
Total No. 
of Startups 
Funded 
1
Unicorn India 
Ventures 
Trust
15.82
63.64
17
2
Aaruha 
Technology 
Fund - 1
6.75
26.22
13
3
Endiya Seed 
Co-creation 
Fund
30.00
137.03
12
4
Karsemven_
fund
24.00
83.43
17
5
pi Ventures 
Fund 1
14.82
186.53
15
6
YourNest 
India VC Fund 
II
43.15
184.78
19
7
Ventureast 
Proactive  
Fund - II
97.74
425.7
18
8
Exfinity 
Technology 
Fund Series II
25.30
227.93
17
Total
257.58
1335.26
128

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Make in India
Annual
2024-2025
74
5.	
Production Linked Incentive Scheme (PLI) for 
Large Scale Electronics Manufacturing 
 
Notified 
vide 
Gazette 
Notification 
No.CG-
DL-E-01042020-218990 dated April 01, 2020, 
the Scheme provides financial incentive to boost 
domestic electronics manufacturing and attract 
large investments. The Scheme extends an 
incentive of 4% to 6% to eligible companies on 
incremental sales (over base year i.e., 2019-20) of 
manufactured goods including mobile phones and 
specified electronic components for a period of five 
years subsequent to the base year. The scheme 
will promote large scale electronics manufacturing 
particularly in the mobile phones segment and 
contribute significantly to achieving a USD 1 trillion 
digital economy and a USD 5 trillion GDP by 2025.
	
PLI Scheme has been a huge success in terms of 
the immense interest received from Global as well 
as Domestic Mobile Manufacturing companies. 
Over the next 5 years, the Scheme is expected to 
lead to total production of about ` 8.12 lakh crore. 
The scheme is also expected to boost exports 
significantly. Out of the total production, about 60% 
is expected to be contributed by exports of the 
order of ` 4.87 lakh crore. The Scheme will bring 
additional investment in electronics manufacturing 
to the tune of ` 7,000 crore. PLI Scheme will also 
help in promotion of domestic champion companies 
by reviving Indian Brands and strengthening Indian 
EMS companies.
	
After the success of the First Round of Production 
Linked Incentive Scheme in attracting investments 
in mobile phone and electronic component 
manufacturing, Second Round of the PLI Scheme 
for Large Scale Electronics Manufacturing was 
launched on 11.03.2021 for incentivizing Electronic 
Components. Under the Second Round, incentives 
of 5% to 3% have been extended on incremental 
sales (over base year i.e., 2019-20) of goods 
manufactured in India and covered under the target 
segment, to eligible companies, for a period of four 
years.
	
In accordance with the announcement made by 
Hon’ble Union Finance & Corporate Affairs Minister 
on 28.06.2021 to provide relief to companies 
approved under the PLI Scheme affected by the 
COVID-19 pandemic, the tenure of the PLI Scheme 
has been extended by one year i.e., from 2024-
25 to 2025-26. The notification in this regard was 
issued on 23.09.2021.
	
The status of PLI Scheme for LSEM till 
December, 2024 is as follows:
	
As of December, 24, the companies approved 
under the PLI Scheme for LSEM have generated 
cumulative investment of INR 10,213 Cr, cumulative 
production of INR 6,62,228 Cr, cumulative exports 
of INR 3,49,342 Cr and cumulative employment of 
1,37,189 (Direct jobs).
6.	
PLI Scheme 2.0 for IT Hardware
 
PLI Scheme 2.0 for IT Hardware was notified on 
29.05.2023 with an approved outlay of Rs.17,000 
crore with an objective to boost domestic 
manufacturing and attract large investments in the 
value chain. The Scheme extends an incentive of 
around 5% (based on localization of components/
sub-assemblies) on net incremental sales (over 
base year) of goods manufactured in India and 
covered under the target segment, to eligible 
companies, for a period of six (6) years. The Target 
Segment includes (i) Laptops (ii) Tablets (iii) All-in-
One PCs and (iv) Servers (v) USFF (Ultra Small 
Form Factor). A total of 27 companies have been 
approved under the Scheme.
	
The Scheme is expected to generate following 
outcomes during its tenure:
	
i)	
Expected incremental production is ` 3.35 
Lakh crore
	
ii)	
Expected incremental investment is ` 2,430 
crores
	
iii)	
Expected incremental direct employment is 
75,000
	
The status of PLI Scheme 2.0 for IT Hardware till 
December, 2024 is as follows:
	
As on 31.12.2024, the PLI Scheme for IT Hardware 
and PLI Scheme 2.0 for IT Hardware have 
combinedly led to a total production of ` 10,014.72 

Make in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
75
crore, total investment of ` 522.17 crore and total 
employment of 3,879.
7.	
Scheme for Promotion of Manufacturing of 
Electronic Components and Semiconductors 
(SPECS) 
 
Notified vide Gazette Notification dated April 01, 
2020, the Scheme provides financial incentive of 
25% on capital expenditure for the identified list 
of electronic goods that comprise downstream 
value chain of electronic products, i.e., electronic 
components, semiconductor/ display fabrication 
units, ATMP units, specialized sub-assemblies 
and capital goods for manufacture of aforesaid 
goods. The scheme promotes development of 
electronic components manufacturing ecosystem 
in the country and deepening of electronics value 
chain and is expected to bring new investments to 
the tune of ` 20,000 crore with total employment 
generation potential (Direct and Indirect) of 
6,00,000. The scheme is closed to receive new 
applications on 31.03.2024.
	
Progress under the scheme till December, 2024 
as per latest Quarterly Progress Report
	
58 applications have been approved with total 
proposed investment of Rs.22,081 crore. As per 
the Quarterly Progress report submitted by the 
applicant total investment done by the approved 
applications is ` 9,481.56 crore. Total production 
done by the approved applications is ` 25,571.59 
crore. Total employment generated by the 
approved applications is 39,092 persons.
8.	
Modified Programme for Development of 
Semiconductors and Display Manufacturing 
Ecosystem in India
	
In furtherance of the vision of AatmaNirbhar Bharat 
and positioning India as the global hub for ESDM, 
a comprehensive program for the development 
of semiconductors and display manufacturing 
ecosystem in India was approved by Government of 
India with an outlay of ` 76,000 crore (>$10 billion). 
The Programme contained various schemes to 
attract investments in the field of semiconductors 
and display manufacturing. The following four 
schemes have been notified under the Semicon 
India Programme: -
8.1	
Modified Scheme for setting up Semiconductor 
Fabs in India
	
•	
The scheme is aimed at attracting large 
investments for setting up semiconductor 
wafer fabrication facilities in the country to 
strengthen the electronics manufacturing 
ecosystem and help establish a trusted val-
ue chain.
	
•	
The Scheme extends a fiscal support of 50% 
of the project cost across the technologyn-
odes for setting up of Silicon based Semi-
conductor Fabs in India.
 
The fiscal support under the scheme shall be 
provided on pari-passu basis for a period of six 
years from the date of approval.
8.2	
Modified Scheme for setting up of Display Fabs 
in India
	
The scheme is aimed at attracting large investments 
for manufacturing TFT LCD or AMOLED based 
display panels in the country to strengthen 
the electronics manufacturing ecosystem. The 
Scheme extends fiscal support of 50% of Project 
Cost for setting up of Display Fabs in India. The 
fiscal support under the scheme shall be provided 
on pari-passu basis for a period of six years from 
the date of approval.
8.3 
Modified Scheme for setting up of Compound 
Semiconductors / Silicon Photonics / Sensors Fab/ 
Discrete Semiconductors Fab and Semiconductor 
Assembly, Testing, Marking and Packaging 
(ATMP) / OSAT facilities in India
 
The scheme extends a fiscal support of 50% 
of the Capital Expenditure for setting up of 
Compound Semiconductors / Silicon Photonics 
(SiPh) / Sensors (including MEMS) Fab/ Discrete 
Semiconductor Fab and Semiconductor ATMP / 
OSAT facilities in India.
8.4	
Design Linked Incentive (DLI) Scheme
 
• 
‘Design Linked Incentive Scheme’ has been 
notified on 21.12.2021. It shall offer financial 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Make in India
Annual
2024-2025
76
incentives as well as design infrastructure 
support across various stages of develop-
ment and deployment of semiconductor de-
sign for Integrated Circuits (ICs), Chipsets, 
System on Chips (SoCs), Systems & IP 
Cores and semiconductor linked design.
 
• 
Under the “Product Design Linked Incen-
tive” component of the scheme, reimburse-
ment of up to 50% of the eligible expenditure 
subject to a ceiling of Rs15 crore per appli-
cation will be provided as fiscal support to 
the approved applicants. This shall include 
expenditure relating to design, development, 
testing, fabrication, validation, prototype de-
velopment, product development, filing of 
Intellectual Property Rights etc. It will also 
include manpower costs.
 
• 
Under the “Deployment Linked Incentive” 
component of the scheme, incentive of 6% 
to 4% of net sales turnover over 5 years sub-
ject to a ceiling of ` 30 crore per application 
will be provided to the approved applicants 
whose semiconductor design for Integrated 
Circuits (ICs), Chipsets, System on Chips 
(SoCs), Systems & IP Cores and semicon-
ductor linked design are deployed in elec-
tronic products.
 
• 
C-DAC is the Nodal Agency to implement 
the scheme and establish the semiconduc-
tor design infrastructure such as EDA Tool 
Grid, repository of IP Cores, hardware and 
software licenses, patents and trademarks 
etc.
8.5	
India Semiconductor Mission (ISM)
 
• 
India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) imple-
ments the schemes for Semiconductor and 
Display Fabs, Compound Semiconductor 
Fabs, Silicon Photonics Fabs, MEMS Sen-
sors Fabs, Discrete Semiconductor Fabs 
and Semiconductor Packaging Units (ATMP 
/ OSAT). It drives the long-term strategies for 
the development of semiconductor and dis-
play ecosystem in the country.
 
• 
The India Semiconductor Mission acts as 
the nodal agency for efficient and smooth 
implementation of the schemes for setting 
up of Semiconductor, Display Fabs and 
Compound 
Semiconductors/ATMP/OSAT 
facilities in India.
8.6	
Semi-Conductor Laboratory (SCL) 
	
The Union Cabinet has also approved that 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
will take requisite steps for modernization and 
commercialization of Semi-conductor Laboratory 
(SCL), Mohali. Semi-conductor Laboratory (SCL), 
Mohali has been brought under the administrative 
control of Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology from Department of Space.
	
SCL is an Integrated Device Manufacturer 
which undertakes activities pertaining to design, 
development, fabrication, assembly & packaging, 
testing and quality assurance of Silicon CMOS and 
MEMS Devices for various applications. Presently, 
SCL has two wafer fabrication lines, i.e., 200 mm 
wafer line operating in 180nm CMOS technology 
and 150 mm wafer line for MEMS technology. SCL 
predominantly caters to low volume requirements 
for various applications.
	
Boston Consulting Group (BCG) has been 
engaged for providing consultancy services for 
Modernization of Semi-Conductor Laboratory, 
Mohali. 
8.7	
Projects approved under the Programme:
	
The Government has approved following projects:
	
i.	
Micron Technology Inc.’s proposal for set-
ting up an ATMP facility in India with an in-
vestment of ` 22,516 crore was approved 
in June 2023. Micron’s facility in India will 
enable assembly and test manufacturing 
for both DRAM and NAND products and ad-
dress demand from domestic and interna-
tional markets with a production capacity of 
around 40 million per week.
	
ii.	
Tata Electronics Private Limited (TEPL)’s 
proposal for setting up a Semiconductor Fab 

Make in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
77
facility in India with an investment of ` 91,526 
crore was approved in February 2024. The 
fab facility will be set up in technology part-
nership with PSMC, Taiwan. PSMC is an 
established semiconductor company hav-
ing 6 semiconductor foundries in Taiwan. 
The production capacity of the project would 
be around 50,000 wafer starts per month 
(WSPM). 
	
iii.	
Tata Electronics Private Limited (TEPL)’s 
proposal for setting up of OSAT facility in 
India with an investment of ` 27,120 crores 
was approved in February 2024. The facility 
will use indigenous semiconductor packag-
ing technologies with a production capacity 
of 48 million per day.
	
iv.	
CG Power and Industrial Solutions Limited’s 
proposal for setting up OSAT facility in India 
with an investment of ` 7,584 crore was also 
approved in February 2024. The facility will 
be set up as joint venture partnership with 
Renesas Electronics America Inc., USA, 
and STARS Microelectronic, Thailand. The 
technology would be provided for this facil-
ity by Renesas Electronics Corporation, Ja-
pan and STARS Microelectronic, Thailand. 
The production capacity would be around 
15.07Million Units per day. 
	
v.	
Kaynes Technology India Limited (KTIL) 
proposal of for setting up of Outsourced 
Semiconductor Assembly and Test (OSAT) 
facility at Sanand, Gujarat for Wire bond In-
terconnect, Substrate Based Packages was 
approved in September, 2024. The Technol-
ogy would be provided by ISO Technology 
Sdn. Bhd. and Aptos Technology Inc. This 
facility will be setup with an investment of ` 
3,307 crore. The facility will have the capac-
ity to produce more than 6.33 Million chips 
per day.
	
vi.	
51 start-ups and MSMEs companies have 
been approved for design infrastructure sup-
port under the DLI Scheme made available 
by ChipIN Centre at C-DAC Bengaluru. Out 
of these, 17 companies have also been ap-
proved for financial support for developing 
semiconductor chip/ SoCs for applications in 
sectors such as automotive, mobility, com-
puting, communications etc namely - DV2JS 
Innovation LLP­, Vervesemi Microelectron-
ics, Fermionic Design, Morphing Machines, 
Calligo Technologies, Sensesemi Technolo-
gies, Saankhya Labs, Aryabhata Circuits and 
Research Labs, BigEndian Semiconductors, 
C2i Semiconductors, Aheesa Digital Innova-
tions, Mindgrove Technologies, InCore Sem-
iconductors, Netrasemi, Green PMU Semi, 
WiSig Networks, MosChip Technologies.
8.8	
Employment: The semiconductor manufacturing 
facilities will generate direct employment of about 
25 thousand advanced technology jobs and about 
60 thousand indirect jobs. 
3.4	
Investment Promotion to Attract Investment in 
ESDM Sector	
3.4.1	 Promotion of PLI, SPECS, EMC 2.0 and 
Schemes for Development of Semiconductors and 
Display Manufacturing Ecosystem in India
To stimulate more investment in the Electronics 
System Design and Manufacturing (ESDM) sector in 
India, several investment promotion initiatives have 
been launched. In addition, these initiatives are aimed 
at creating a world-class semiconductor and display 
manufacturing ecosystem, these efforts also include the 
introduction of significant schemes like the PLI Scheme 
2.0 for IT Hardware. Further, thorough outreach plan that 
includes online meetings with possible investors and in-
depth presentations outlining the advantages of these 
programs were conducted. To address the concerns and 
establish a clear investment path, high-level discussions 
were arranged, including direct interactions between 
company representatives and senior officials from MeitY. 
As a result of these promotional efforts, India is now 
seen as a potential ESDM destination and have greatly 
increased awareness and interest in the international 
industry.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Make in India
Annual
2024-2025
78
3.4.2	 Advocacy and Outreach Programmes
A stakeholder Meeting on “Empowering Industries: 
Unlocking Tomorrow’s Potential with PLI Schemes” 
was held at Bharat Mandapam in February 2024 in the 
presence of Hon’ble Commerce and Industries Minister 
(CIM). This event highlighted Electronics PLI Scheme’s 
insights and achievements. The gathering shed light on 
the insights and accomplishments of the Electronics PLI 
Scheme, showcasing its significant contributions and 
promising prospects for the future.
The 4th Electronics Supply Chain Summit was, held in 
Noida in collaboration with ELCINA. The B2B forum 
had participation of over 200 delegates from 100+ 
companies. This business development program aimed 
to strengthen local manufacturing of Components, EMS, 
Semiconductor Products & Modules,  and product 
segments including  Mobiles &  Accessories, Consumer 
Electronics, Lighting Equipment, Auto Electronics/
EVs, Security Products, IT products among others.
ICEA organised the conference on “Sub-Assemblies 
& Components
The Next Phase of Growth in India’s Electronics 
Manufacturing” in New Delhi to chart out the roadmap 
for increasing Domestic Value Addition (DVA) in Indian 
Electronics.
Semicon India Conference 2024 (11-13 September 
2024)
SEMICON India 2024, held from September 11-13 at the 
India Exposition Mart Ltd. (IEML) in Greater Noida, Delhi 
NCR, was a pivotal event spotlighting the rapid growth of 
India’s semiconductor ecosystem and emerging industry 
trends. Inaugurated by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, 
it brought together global leaders, industry experts, 
academia, and government officials to explore cutting-
edge innovations in areas such as smart manufacturing, 
supply chain optimization, sustainability, and workforce 
development. 

Make in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
79
With over 263 exhibitors and 45,000 in-person 
attendees, it established itself as one of Southeast 
Asia’s premier platforms for showcasing advancements 
in semiconductors and electronics. Representatives 
from Applied Materials, Cadence, CG Power, KLA, Lam 
Research, Micron, NXP, Renesas, TATA Electronics, 
Tokyo Electron, SiLT, KAS Technologies, Western 
Digital, DISCO, Merck, Jacobs, and many other industry 
leaders attended the event.
3.4.3	 Outreach Activities for Shifting Global Value 
Chain
As part of MeitY’s ongoing outreach efforts, several 
interactions were organized with industry stakeholders 
to raise awareness about the PLI Scheme 2.0 for IT 
Hardware. These engagements aimed to encourage 
companies to localize their manufacturing processes 
in alignment with the newly introduced scheme, with a 
focus on boosting domestic production and creating 
employment opportunities within the IT hardware 
sector. Meetings with the applicants of PLI Scheme 
(IT Hardware & LSEM) to discuss investment plans, 
progress and challenges were conducted time to time by 
senior officials of MeitY 
International Collaborations and Business Delegation 
Visits
A Taiwan Electrical and Electronic Manufacturers’ 
Association (TEEMA) delegation called-on Secretary on 
8th August, 2024. The discussions during the meeting 
focused on the way forward for India-Taiwan collaboration, 
fostering innovation and support technological growth in 
the electronics sector. 
MeitY officials held discussion with delegation from 
Foxconn led by Dr. Young Liu, Chairman, Foxconn about 
Foxconn’s plan for development of electronics ecosystem 
including Semiconductors in India on 14th August, 2024.
• 
3rd India-Taiwan CEOs Roundtable Meeting & 2024 
India-Taiwan Industrial Collaboration Summit was 
held along with FICCI in partnership with TAITRA, 
TEEMA & CNFI at New Delhi. Joint Secretary 
(Electronics) Shri Sushil Pal addressed the session 
wherein he highlighted that the global winds of 
trade dynamics present an opportune window for 
leapfrogging India-Taiwan industrial partnership 
to the next level.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Make in India
Annual
2024-2025
80
• 
Indo-US Task Force for Electronics – 2nd 
Roundtable of Indo-US Task force was held on 4th 
October 2024 in association with ICEA comprising 
Industry leaders in the sector to boost and elevate 
electronics trade between India and USA to approx. 
$100 Bn within a decade from the current $13 Bn 
figure. 
3.4.4	 National Level Events & Facilitations
Task Force on Making India an Electronics & 
Semiconductor Product Nation
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, 
Government of India constituted a Task Force under the 
chairmanship of Prof. Ajay K. Sood, Principal Scientific 
Advisor to the Govt. of India to achieve the objectives 
of making India a product developer and manufacturer 
nation. The Task Force, consisting of members from both 
Industry and Government, had detailed deliberations 
and identified following potential areas where strategic 
initiatives are required to make India an Electronics & 
Semiconductor Product Nation:
(i) 
identification of products (with B2B and B2C 
perspectives)
(ii)	
Components and sub-systems other than chips
(iii)	
Chip requirement for India (Chips for All)
(iv)	
Policy, Regulations, Taxation and Tariffs, EoDB, 
Competitiveness
Numerous other Industry consultation sessions and 
one-to one meeting with ESDM companies were also 
conducted to understand the issues being faced by them.

Make in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
81
3.4.5	 International Events & Facilitations
• 
Outreach 
engagements 
held 
with 
Indian 
Consulates/ 
Embassies/ 
High 
Commissions 
in other countries for promoting the schemes 
launched by MeitY.
• 
MeitY participated in various Investment Promotion 
Roadshows organized by other Ministries like 
DPIIT to Taiwan, Korea, Japan, Singapore etc.
• 
MeitY also contributed to international engagements 
like G20, India-EU TTC, India-Taiwan Cooperation 
Forum, 
World 
Economic 
Forum, 
Industrial 
Collaboration Working Group (ICWG) between 
India and Taiwan (ICWG), India-Japan Industrial 
Competitiveness Partnership (IJICP)
3.4.6	 Social Media Participation
To reach out to all ESDM stakeholders, all the events, 
webinars were widely promoted on X (erstwhile Twitter) 
through the official handle (Electronics Gol) of the IPHW 
Division of MeitY. 
3.4.6.1 International Collaborations in the field of 
Semiconductors
MoU with Singapore: Government of India has recently 
signed an MoU with Singapore to establish an “India-
Singapore Semiconductor Ecosystem Policy Dialogue”. 
The Policy Dialogue will be used as a platform to:
• 
Discuss semiconductor supply chain related 
issues;
• 
Exchange best practices to leverage opportunities 
for growth in the global semiconductor industry;
• 
Explore areas for mutually beneficial semiconductor 
R&D collaboration; 
• 
Encourage collaboration between Singapore-
based 
and 
India-based 
companies 
towards 
mutually beneficial semiconductor related business 
opportunities and partnerships;
• 
Consider initiatives to enhance semiconductor 
supply chain resilience, based on areas of 
mutual strength such as fabs, packaging, design, 
equipment, 
specialty 
chemicals 
and 
gases, 
semiconductor grade materials;
• 
Promote 
Industrial 
Parks 
and 
workforce 
development for mutual benefit.
Building on the Semiconductor MoU, the first India-
Singapore Semiconductor Ecosystem Policy Dialogue, 
co-chaired by Secretary, MeitY, Shri S Krishnan & 
Permanent Secretary, MTI, was held in November,2024.
3.4.6.2	 Capacity building and talent development for 
semiconductors
New curriculums have been launched by AICTE at UG, 
Diploma level as a step towards creation of Talent pool 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Make in India
Annual
2024-2025
82
in Semiconductor design and Manufacturing domain. 
Curriculums at Diploma, UG and PG level have been 
adopted by more than 625 colleges and institutes with 
approved intake of 16,307 students. These courses at 
Diploma and UG level will drastically reduce the time 
gap to make students industry ready. Semiconductor 
design and technology specific curriculums in Diploma 
and Engineering, have been designed according to 
Semiconductor industry needs. 
ISM has signed an MoU with Purdue University, to 
enable collaboration for development of skilled workforce 
(through curation of specific courses/ academic 
programs), specialized R&D programs, collaboration for 
funding/ grants support.
Lam 
Research, 
USA, 
Semiconductor 
Equipment 
Manufacture has announced to train 60,000 workforce 
in the next 10 years through its Semiverse Solution 
virtual platform in collaboration with Indian academic 
institutions, aiming to expedite India’s semiconductor 
education and workforce development goals.
3.4.7	 R&D Road map
Applied Materials Inc. (AMAT) has announced a planned 
investment of $400 Mn to establish Collaborative 
Engineering Centre in Bangalore. During the initial 5 
years. the center would support $2Bn+ of spending and 
create ~500 advanced engineering jobs. This initiative 
will facilitate R&D collaboration amongst R&D team of 
Applied Materials, Indian academic institutions and 
R&D team of vendors of Applied Materials. This will 
also help in development and sourcing of components/
sub-assemblies required for the AMAT’s semiconductor 
equipment.
3.5	
 Measures to facilitate Ease of Doing Business:
Central Board of Indirect Taxes & Customs (CBIC), 
Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance has 
decided to exempt the Electronics and Semiconductor 
Manufacturing Sector from application of Section 65A of 
the Customs Act.
3.6	
Other programs
Compulsory Safety Standards for Electronics
The “Electronics and Information Technology Goods 
(Requirements for Compulsory Registration) Order, 
2012” was notified on 3rd  October, 2012 under the 
Compulsory Registration Scheme notified by Bureau of 
Indian Standards (BIS) under the ambit of the BIS Act, 
1986, to ensure the     safety of Indian consumers and 
curb the inflow of substandard electronic products. The 
Order has been migrated to BIS Act 2016 as “Electronics 
and Information Technology Goods (Requirement of 
Compulsory Registration) Order, 2021”. The Order 
necessitates   creation   of   an institutional   mechanism  
for     developing     and     mandating     standards     and 
certification for electronic products to strengthen 
Conformity Assessment infrastructure nationwide. As 
per the provisions of the Order,  before manufacturing, 
import, sale, stock etc of the products notified under 
the schedule of the Order, the products need to be 
registered with BIS based on testing of the notified 
product at BIS recognized laboratories as per the Indian 
Standards. The registration is granted to a manufacturer 
for manufacturing a product at a particular location. 
The Compulsory Registration Scheme has resulted in 
high compliance of notified electronic goods to Indian 
safety standards and more than 45,000 registrations have 
been granted by BIS to manufacturing units covering 
approximately 4,00,000 products models/series.
Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India) 
Order 2017
Government has issued Public Procurement (Preference 
to Make in India) [PPP-MII] Order 2017 vide the 
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal 
Trade (DPIIT) Order No. P-45021/2/2017-B.E.-II dated 
15.06.2017 with subsequent revisions dated 28.05.2018, 
29.05.2019, 04.06.2020, 16.09.2020 and 19.07.2024 to 
encourage ‘Make in India’ and to promote manufacturing 
and production of goods, services and works in India with 
a view to enhancing income and employment. 
In furtherance of the aforesaid revised Order, MeitY has 
notified mechanism for calculating local content for 14 
Electronic Products dated 07.09.2020 and 06.03.2024 
viz., (i) Desktop PCs, (ii) Thin Clients, (iii) Computer 
Monitors, (iv) Laptop PCs, (v) Tablet PCs, (vi) Dot 
Matrix Printers, (vii) Contact and Contactless Smart 
Cards, (viii) LED Products, (ix) Biometric Access Control 
/ Authentication Devices, (x) Biometric Finger Print 

Make in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
83
Sensors, (xi) Biometric Iris Sensors, (xii) Servers, (xiii) 
Cellular Mobile Phones and (xiv) CCTV/VSS Systems, 
for procurement to be made from local suppliers.
3.7	
Centre of Excellence in Electronics and ICT 
application 
3.7.1	 National Centre of Excellence for Large Area 
Flexible Electronics (NCFlexE)
The project for setting up of National Centre of Excellence 
for Large Area Flexible Electronics (NCFlexE) at IIT-
Kanpur was approved on 14th November, 2014 with a 
project cost of ` 132.99 crore including Government 
Grant-in-aid (GIA) of ` 111.12 crore. The main objective 
of the NCFlexE centre is to establish a research 
programme to engage in leading edge research in 
large area of flexible electronics and building strategic 
academic collaborations to address requirements 
through joint technology developments and to realize 
home-grown technologies for manufacturing. 
The centre has been established with state-of-the-art 
laboratory facilities in the emerging flexible electronics 
area and has a portfolio of 64 filed patents. 7 Technology/ 
Know-how have been transferred to industry including 
incubation & mentoring support to start-ups. A startup 
M/s Transpack Ltd. has been incubated in Anti-
counterfeiting technology. The technology has been 
transferred to M/s SPMCIL and got ordered of more than 
300 crore from Delhi Excise Department etc. The other 
startup M/s Likhotronics Pvt. Ltd. has been incubated 
recently for the product Educational Kits using special 
inks. In addition, 5 technologies of the centre have been 
transferred to industries/start-ups for commercialization. 
Several companies have invested in the centre for R&D, 
prototype & product developments etc. The Centre is 
working closely with industries to meet their requirement 
in this thematic area and developed various prototypes 
like Temperature Sensors for Milk Adulteration & Gas 
Sensors for Food Spoilage, Smart Label with tamper 
evident tracking, OLED Display, Handheld Infrared 
Thermometer, 
Screen-printed 
sensor 
for 
Bilirubin 
detection in Serum, Warm Hug/Heater Jackets, TFT 
Array, Sensor for Breast Cancer detection, Smart IV 
Bottle, Piano keyboard on paper etc. 
Product/prototype developed in the Centre
The Phase-I has successfully achieved its targeted 
objectives. Based on achieving of projected milestones 
and to take the center activities further, the Ministry of 
Electronics & IT accorded approval to IIT-Kanpur on 
24.11.2023 for initiation of Phase-II activity with a project 
cost of ` 83.08 crore including Government Grant-in-aid 
of ` 60.00 crore from MeitY, ` 10.00 crore as industry 
contribution and ` 13.08 crore from IIT-Kanpur. As on 
date , MeitY has released a Grant-in-aid of ` 5.79 crores 
to IIT-K towards the Phase-II of the project. Under the 
Phase-II, prima-facie, the prototypes /technological 
applications in the field of level & Packaging, Strategic 
and Healthcare sector (but not limited to) has been 
considered to address the technological requirement of 
the industry/organization in these sectors. The center 
facility is available for industry/start-ups/academia / 
MSME /other organizations for active collaboration. 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Make in India
Annual
2024-2025
84
Under Phase-II, 5 industrial projects have been initiated 
and 2 prototypes viz; sustainable sensing platform for 
electrochemical sensors using sugarcane skin having 
varied applications from biosensing to heavy metal 
detection and Li ion-based technology (coin cell) having 
capacity of > 30 mAH developed and under field trial. 2 
Technologies have been transferred to the industry. 
Product /
technology
Industry
Sector
Status
Bilirubin Sen-
sor 
Sensa Core 
Medical 
Instrumenta-
tion Pvt. Ltd.
Health-
care
Technology 
Licensed to 
M/s Sensa 
Core
LFIA based 
strips for de-
tection of bo-
vine mastitis
Prompt
Equipment 
Pvt. Ltd.
Food 
Safety
Technology 
Licensed to 
M/s PROMPT 
Equipment’s
3.7.2	 National Centre of Excellence in Technology 
for Internal Security (NCETIS)
National Centre of Excellence in Technology for Internal 
Security (NCETIS) at IIT-Bombay has been approved 
on 28th May, 2015 with a total outlay of ` 83.89 crore 
(MeitY contribution: ` 83.89 crore). The aim of the CoE 
is to address the challenges of homeland security and 
to develop state-of-the-art technologies which are vital 
for the national security agencies for providing rescue 
and relief operations with the indigenously developed 
technologies/ products. The project is envisaged 
to set up the required infrastructures and carrying 
out R&D activities for developing prototype model, 
commercialization and technology transfer of multiple 
products. The project has been completed in March 
2023. Under the project, various technologies have been 
developed and three of them have commercialized. 
Explosive detector developed under the project has been 
registered and made available at GEM portal after the 
successful certification and trials. Two Start-ups have 
been incubated under the CoE.
3.7.3	 Next Generation AMOLED Displays, OLED 
Lighting and OPV Products
The project “Next Generation AMOLED Displays, OLED 
Lighting and OPV products: Development of disruptive 
Technologies to enable cost effective electronic 
component manufacturing in India”, approved by MeitY 
and being implemented by IIT Madras with total budget 
outlay of INR 41.60 Crore, including MeitY’s Grant-
in-Aid amounting to INR 34.65 Crore. The objective of 
the centre is to demonstrate state- of-the-art AMOLED 
based displays developed by Fine Metal Mask (FMM) 
and Closed Space Sublimation (CSS) processes. 
OPV devices are also being developed for roll-to-
roll manufacturing. A laboratory has been developed 
successfully for state-of-the-art research facility. A clean 
area has been set up of area around 3000 sq. ft. There 
are two parts in the clean area. One is of class 100 and 
the rest of the area is of class 1000. The class 100 area 
is used for substrate cleaning, which is very crucial for 
the fabrication. Class 1000 area has all the deposition 
units and is utilized for AMOLED device fabrication.
AMOLED Dock system control

Make in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
85
3.7.4	 Centre of Excellence in Medical Electronics 
and Bio-Physics
• 
Centre of Excellence on Medical Electronics 
and Bio-Physics has been set up at the Andhra 
Pradesh 
MedTech 
Zone 
Limited 
(AMTZ), 
Visakhapatnam with a total outlay of `32.02 crore 
(MeitY contribution: `18.67 crore). The Center of 
Excellence in Medical Electronics and Bio-Physics 
has been approved in April 2020. The Project is 
being implemented by the Kalam Institute of Health 
Technology (KIHT), AMTZ for a period of three 
years.
• 
The aim of the project is to strengthen the medical 
electronics devices manufacturing eco-system 
in the country with suitable innovations, import 
substitution and value addition, etc. The objectives 
of the CoE are to provide functional research 
support to design and prototyping for manufacturing 
in ESDM, conduct R&D for manufacturing of 
electronics and integration of components to 
make functional critical parts (PCB assembly/ 
sub-assembly) for medical devices, carrying out 
Bio-Physics research such as Bio-Organs/ Electro-
organs, etc., and research and prototyping of key 
electro-potential based components, etc.
The CoE, since its inception has been providing functional 
research 
support 
for 
innovators, 
manufacturers, 
researchers on medical devices and has led to the 
following achievements:       
• 
Skill building on ESDM has led to 82 trained 
professionals.
• 
Design, Prototype and Manufacturing for ESDM 
has enabled PCBA line installation which supports 
production of 10,000 units of ventilators, 5000 
Oxygen Concentrators, 100 units of Defibrillator.
• 
Electro Bio Physics research has enabled 
development of prosthetic arms and prototyping of 
electro-bio organs.
• 
Ongoing research at Centre for Bio-physics include 
development of 3D bio printed synthetic ears.
• 
10 startups have been supported so far. 
3.7.5	 Establishment 
of 
Gallium 
Nitride 
(GaN) 
Ecosystem Enabling Centre and Incubator (GEECI) 
at Society for Innovation and Development (SID), IISc 
Bengaluru
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
has awarded the project to Society for Innovation and 
Development (SID), IISc Bengaluru for “Establishment of 
Gallium Nitride (GaN) Ecosystem Enabling Centre and 
Incubator (GEECI) for High Power and High-Frequency 
Electronics” at Centre for Nano Science and Engineering 
(CeNSE), Bengaluru with budget outlay of ` 334.30 Crore. 
The project envisions to nucleate an end-to-end ecosystem 
for enabling GaN-based electronics manufacturing in the 
country for power and RF electronics. The incubator will 
be a R&D foundry dedicated to GaN that will function 
to generate its own IP, generate IP for industries based 
on their problem definition for a fee and provide foundry 
services for pilot scale manufacturing. The objective of 
the Project is to establish GaN-based Development Line 
Foundry facility for RF and Power applications and to 
incubate startups and Entrepreneur-in-Residence.
The project is expected to meet India’s strategic RF needs 
and develop devices that can be used to make prototype 
systems for the emerging 5G and power applications. 
Establishment of GaN foundry facility as part of the 
Incubator will help to stimulate the flow of capital 
and technology, create employment opportunities, 
promote higher value addition in the electronic products 
manufactured in the country, especially in RF and power 
applications, including strategic applications, reduce 
dependence on imports and give thrust to the Hon’ble 
Prime Minister’s clarion call for “Atmanirbhar Bharat’’.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Make in India
Annual
2024-2025
86

CHAPTER
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
87
4.1	
Introduction
With the Government’s outlook on Digital Diplomacy, 
Digital Economy and launch of Digital India Program (DIP), 
MeitY has synergized its efforts to expand Electronics 
and IT/Software sector globally. This expansion aims 
to diversify markets, enhance specialized knowledge 
in various domains, and leverage the expertise of a 
highly skilled workforce, creating new business avenues 
worldwide. For the promulgation of the public policy 
objectives, MeitY has been actively working to build 
strategic alliances with foreign partners, especially in 
the emerging areas of Information and communications 
technology (ICT), through bilateral and multilateral 
cooperation.
MeitY 
regularly 
engages 
with 
various 
foreign 
governments, academic institutions, and industry bodies 
to develop partnerships that are mutually beneficial, 
promoting the exchange of expertise, experience sharing 
and fostering innovation. The International Cooperation 
Division (ICD) of MeitY has taken the lead in driving 
these initiatives, focusing on key areas such as:
• 
Supporting National Goals: Ensuring that 
all international collaborations align with key 
government initiatives like ‘Digital India’ and ‘Make 
in India,’ which are central to India’s long-term digital 
transformation and manufacturing objectives.
• 
Engaging in Global Forums: Enhancing India’s 
presence and leadership on international platforms 
to address key issues such as G20, SCO, BRICS, 
ASEAN, digital transformation, bridging the digital 
and gender divides, and strengthening digital 
governance and infrastructure.
• 
Facilitating International Industry Collaboration: 
Creating 
an 
environment 
that 
encourages 
cooperation between Indian industries and their 
international counterparts to foster innovation and 
joint development in cutting-edge ICT solutions.
• 
Encouraging R&D Initiatives: Supporting inter-
national research and development partnerships 
to accelerate advancements in ICT applications, 
thereby contributing to the development of ground-
breaking digital technologies.
• 
Coordinating 
with 
Global 
Institutions: 
Collaborating with international organizations 
such as the UN agencies (including UNESCO, 
UNCTAD, UNDP, ECOSOC, and ESCAP), WSIS, 
World Bank, WTO, ADB, and the World Economic 
Forum (WEF). These partnerships help safeguard 
India’s interests and ensure that the country’s 
priorities are represented in global ICT policies and 
discussions.
• 
Spearheading Collaborative Projects: Launching 
joint projects with global partners, including 
establishing IT institutes, software development 
parks, digital solutions and initiating joint R&D 
ventures.
• 
Promoting India’s ICT Expertise: Showcasing 
India’s ICT strength across various international 
forums by organizing, sponsoring and participating 
in trade fairs, symposiums, exhibitions, etc.
To achieve these objectives, the ICD, MeitY engages 
through various mechanisms, such as Memorandums 
of Understanding (MoUs), Joint Working Group (JWG) 
meetings, Free Trade Agreement (FTA) and multilateral 
deliberations/negotiations in the ICT, digital economy 
and digital trade areas. The ICD also leads India’s 
involvement in key international events to highlight the 
potential of Indian IT and software industries. Moreover, 
the division actively works to address the challenges 
related to the export of Indian IT services and the mobility 
International 
Cooperation
4

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
International Cooperation
Annual
2024-2025
88
of IT professionals, representing these issues at global 
forums.
Through these efforts, MeitY aims to strengthen India’s 
position as a key player in the global digital economy, 
promoting its ICT capabilities while ensuring that the 
country’s interests and expertise are well-reflected in 
international collaborations.
4.2	
Multilateral Cooperation
To protect its national interests and advance its digital 
transformation on the global stage, MeitY has been 
actively engaging with various multilateral forums. 
These efforts involve collaboration, negotiations, and 
addressing technical and policy challenges with key 
international forums/organizations like the G20, G7, 
BRICS, SCO, WTO, UN-ESCAP, BIMSTEC, World 
Bank, ADB, Commonwealth, IPU, ITU, ASEAN, SAARC, 
OECD, IPEF, QUAD, and others in the IT, software, and 
electronics sectors.
India’s participation in various international forums 
highlights its commitment to driving digital progress and 
fostering partnerships with global stakeholders. Through 
these forums, India showcases its achievements, 
explores opportunities for collaboration, and strengthens 
its influence in shaping the global digital economy. 
4.3	
Key Achievements
Brazil’s G20 Presidency 2024: MeitY represented 
India in the G20 Digital Economy Working Group and 
Ministerial meetings under the Brazilian Presidency 
in 2024 to discuss four priority areas i.e. Digital 
Inclusion, Universal and Meaningful Connectivity; Digital 
Government and Inclusive Digital Public Infrastructure; 
Integrity of Information Online and Trust in the Digital 
Economy; and Artificial Intelligence for Inclusive 
Sustainable Development and Inequality Reduction. 
MeitY negotiated the key issues and put forth the DPI 
agenda agreed under the Indian Presidency in 2023. 
The G20 Digital Economy Maceió Ministerial Declara-
tion on Digital Inclusion for All, was ultimately adopted 
during the Digital Economy Ministers Meeting (DEMM) 
which reiterates the priorities of the Working Group and 
strengthens commitments on the proposed deliverables 
on Universal and Meaningful Connectivity, Governance 
of Digital Identity, Data access and data sharing, Infor-
mation Integrity and Trust, and AI for good and for all. 
WEF’s Annual Meeting 2024: The 54th World Economic 
Forum (WEF) Annual Meeting held in Davos, Switzerland, 
from January 15-19, 2024, provided a significant platform 
for India to showcase its digital initiatives and strengthen 
global partnerships in the technology sector. The Hon’ble 
Minister of Electronics and Information Technology 
was part of the Indian government delegation and 
actively participated in various sessions and roundtable 
discussions with global political and business leaders. 
The Minister emphasized India’s strategic focus on 
driving economic growth through investments in digital 
and physical infrastructure, semiconductor, electronics 
manufacturing, 
and 
inclusive 
development. 
The 
engagements included advancing India’s semiconductor 
program, fostering AI development, and establishing 
partnerships with various global firms. India’s leadership 
in building resilient supply chains and advancing Digital 
Public Infrastructure (DPI) was prominently highlighted 
during the WEF sessions.
The 3rd Voice of Global South Summit (VOGSS 3.O): 
The 3rd Voice of Global South Summit (VOGSS 3.O) 
was convened virtually on August 17, 2024, with the 
overarching theme, “An Empowered Global South for a 
Sustainable Future”, to deliberate on the Global South’s 
priorities and the solutions that could emerge from 
partner countries in the developing world. It also served 
as a platform to discuss ideas and solutions from the 
Global South on various developmental priorities.
During the summit a session for Information & Technology 
Ministers themed “DPIs for Development - A Global 
South Approach,” was chaired by Secretary, MeitY. This 
session focused on leveraging DPIs for development, 
particularly from the perspective of the Global South. 
Secretary, MeitY shared use-case examples of India’s 
DPI models in bringing about efficiencies and better 
governance, achieving SDGs and ensuring last-mile 
delivery. Participants agreed on the need to enhance 
interoperability among global DPI models, encourage 
sharing of best-practices, build trust among diverse 
stakeholders in the digital ecosystem, and encourage 
private and public innovation and competition to provide 
viable DPI options to Global South countries. 

International Cooperation
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
89
The Second G7 Ministers’ Meeting on Industry and 
Technological Innovation: Secretary, MeitY, led India 
at the Second G7 Ministers’ Meeting on Industry and 
Technological Innovation in Rome, Italy, on October 
10, 2024. He highlighted India’s commitments through 
electronics and semiconductor initiatives, the DPI 
approach, and the responsible use of AI for a globally 
digitally inclusive society.
The 2024 Annual Members Meeting organized by 
the Digital Public Goods Alliance (DPGA): MeitY 
participated in the 2024 Annual Members Meeting 
organized by the Digital Public Goods Alliance (DPGA) 
from November 13–15, 2025, in Singapore. The event 
provided valuable insights into enhancing India’s DPI 
initiatives and ensuring alignment with global standards 
and best practices.
4.4	
Bilateral Cooperation
With the Government’s outlook on Digital diplomacy, 
Digital Economy and the launch of the Digital India 
Programme, MeitY has synergized its efforts to expand the 
IT and electronics sector globally including diversification 
of geographies, domain expertise, and highly skilled 
workforce to enhance business opportunities. Efforts 
have also been made to evolve strategic cooperation with 
potential foreign partners in emerging and frontier areas 
of Information and Communication Technology. The 
Ministry regularly engages with various Governments 
including academic and industry bodies to forge 
partnerships for mutual progress, and also provide an 
opportunity for the sharing of knowledge and experience. 
The International Cooperation Division has been involved 
in the following tasks:
• 
Aligning foreign collaboration activities in India’s 
‘Digital India program’ and ‘Make in India’ initiatives 
of the Government of India.
• 
Creating a conducive environment for international 
cooperation to help industries to cooperate with the 
industries of other countries. 
• 
Fostering, encouraging and promoting research 
and development in the application of information 
technology related facilities.
• 
Initiating joint projects like IT institutes, software 
parks, programmes for joint R&D and facilitating IT 
Advisers etc. 
• 
Showcasing India’s ICT strength across the globe 
by organizing, sponsoring and participating in trade 
fairs, symposiums, exhibitions etc. 
The International Cooperation Division of this Ministry 
has been pursuing the above objectives through 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs), Joint Working 
Groups (JWG) meetings, Projects in other geographies/
countries, participating in major international events 
to showcase India’s strength and enhance business 
opportunity for Indian IT Industries. The division has also 
spearheaded the negotiations on Digital Trade chapter 
under various forums/ Free Trade Agreements (FTAs). 
To 
strengthen 
cooperation 
with 
other 
emerging 
economies, the MoUs/ Agreements in the field of Digital 
technologies and Semiconductor were signed with the 
Malaysia, Singapore and UAE. Further, in order to expand 
India’s Digital capabilities in Digital Public Infrastructure 
(DPIs), MeitY has signed  MoUs on cooperation in the 
field of sharing successful digital solutions implemented 
at population scale for digital transformation with the 
9 recipient countries - Cuba, Colombia, Lao People’s 
Democratic Republic, Saint Kitts & Nevis, Ethiopia, 
Jamaica, Gambia, Fiji and Guyana. 
4.4.1 Major bilateral engagements
1.	
A meeting between India and Estonia was held 
on 9 January 2024 in New Delhi. The Estonian 
side expressed interest in renewing the MoU and 
indicated a desire to collaborate in the fields of AI, 
HPC, startups, e-health, and cybersecurity. 
2.	
A meeting between MeitY and the French 
Ambassador for Digital Affairs was held on 22 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
International Cooperation
Annual
2024-2025
90
February 2024. The focus areas of the meeting 
included DPI and the achievements of the G20 in 
promoting DPIs, AI, India’s presidency of the GPAI, 
and the Digital Personal Data Protection Act.
3.	
A meeting between the co-chairs of the Indo-French 
Joint Working Group for Digital Technology was 
held virtually on March 22, 2024. The focus areas 
of discussion included cooperation in emerging 
technologies, specifically Artificial Intelligence, 
Quantum Computing, semiconductors, startup 
innovation, and DPI.
4.	
The Hon’ble MEIT visited Doha, Qatar, on 27 
February 2024, where he addressed a session on 
‘Digital Public Infrastructure’ during Web Summit 
Qatar 2024. During the visit, the Hon’ble MEIT also 
engaged in bilateral meetings with the Chairman 
of the Qatar Investment Authority, the Minister of 
Transport, and the Minister of Communications 
and IT, met with about 100 business leaders from 
India and Qatar, and participated in a community 
engagement event.
5.	
A team of journalists from the Central Europe 
region met Secretary, MeitY, on March 15, 2024. 
The Secretary informed the delegation about the 
establishment of three semiconductor units under 
the ‘Development of Semiconductors and Display 
Manufacturing Ecosystems in India’ initiative, as 
well as developments in Digital Public Infrastructure 
(DPI).
6.	
The Joint Secretary (ICD), MeitY, virtually 
participated in the 3rd Summit for Democracy in 
Seoul, Republic of Korea, on March 18, 2024. He 
briefed participants about the Digital India initiative, 
India’s DPI approach to digital transformation and 
development, initiatives on AI in India, and the 
Social Impact Fund (SIF) for accelerating DPI 
implementation across Global South nations. 
7.	
A seminar on “Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI): 
Empowering Nations for the Digital Era” was held 
on March 26, 2024, to explore the transformative 
potential of DPI in enabling seamless service deliv-
ery, empowering communities through inclusivity, 
and enriching economies by driving innovation. 
8.	
Bilateral meetings with the Government of Sri 
Lanka on digital transformation took place on 
March 27, 2024, in Colombo, Sri Lanka. MeitY 
participated and shared insights and experiences 
from India’s success story with DPI, along with 
global and regional perspectives. 
9.	
A meeting between India and Vietnam was held 
on May 15, 2024, at New Delhi. The discussions 
focused on cooperation in data center development 
in Vietnam, as well as collaboration in cybersecurity, 
artificial intelligence, emerging technologies, and 
the startup ecosystem.
10.	
Several meetings were held between India and 
Japan to discuss UPI deployment in Japan. India 
provided a presentation on the infrastructure, 
operational aspects, and use cases to apprise the 
Japanese side about the concept of UPI. Further, 
India and Japan also discussed collaboration 
focused on the semiconductor ecosystem, artificial 
intelligence, and the India-Japan Digital Partnership 
(IJDP).
11.	
The Embassy of India organized a seminar titled 
“Building Digital Bridges: India-Japan Digital 
Partnership” on September 30, 2024, in which MeitY 
virtually participated and delivered a presentation 
on India’s digital transformation journey and 
potential areas of cooperation between India and 
Japan in the digital sector.
12.	
Secretary, MeitY participated in the Session on 
“Investment: Economic Prospects in India” during 
the 3rd India- Japan Forum on December 06, 2024 
in New Delhi.
13.	
A meeting between India and Uzbekistan was held 
on July 17, 2024. The discussions focused on 
DPI, the IT and startup ecosystem, and exploring 
potential partnerships in IT education, including 
skill development initiatives.
14.	
On July 26, 2024, a team of journalists from 
Nepal visited MeitY and had a conversation 
with Secretary, MeitY about the growth of the 
Electronics Manufacturing Ecosystem in India, DPI, 
and various capacity-building programs carried out 
by NIELIT. 

International Cooperation
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
91
15.	
Under the framework of the MoU on Semiconductor, 
the 1st India-Singapore Semiconductor Policy 
Dialogue was held on November 5, 2024 in New 
Delhi. Discussions emphasized India’s initiative 
and Singapore’s expertise in supply chains, 
R&D, and workforce development. Key priorities 
included skill development, joint R&D in advanced 
packaging, compound semiconductors, and trade 
optimization.
16.	
The India-US Information and Communications 
Technology Working Group (ICTWG) Meeting was 
held at Sushma Swaraj Bhawan on October 17, 
2024. The meeting, in which the Secretary, MeitY, 
and the US Ambassador to India participated, saw 
fruitful discussions on varied topics, including IT/
IT-enabled services, digital talent, cross-border 
data flows, data privacy, collaboration in AI, 
semiconductor and electronics manufacturing, and 
telecommunications. 
17.	
A virtual meeting of the Technology and IT Joint 
Working Group, co-chaired by India and Saudi 
Arabia under the Economy and Investment Pillar 
of the Strategic Partnership Council, was held 
on October 14, 2024. MeitY also participated in 
the 5th Senior Officials Meeting of the Economy 
and Investment Committee under the Strategic 
Partnership Council, held on October 17, 2024, at 
NITI Aayog.
18.	
MeitY virtually participated in a panel discussion 
on “Deep Dive Digital Dialogues: Results, 
Opportunities, and Prospects for International 
Cooperation in Digital Policy” during the 17th 
Federal Government Digital Summit, Germany, on 
October 22, 2024. The panel discussion focused 
on AI, DPI, digital literacy, and cybersecurity.
19.	
On November 7, 2024, the 8th session of the Indo-
Russia Joint Working Group on ICT Cooperation, 
co-chaired by the Secretary, MeitY, and Russia’s 
Deputy Minister of Digital Development, was held. 
Discussions during the meeting covered IT/ITeS, 
ESDM, telecom, cybersecurity, digital governance, 
and digital education.
4.4.2	 International Projects 
To showcase India’s prowess in the electronics and IT 
sector and emerging technologies, MeitY has initiated 
joint projects with various countries. Also, MeitY has been 
assisting the Ministry of External Affairs in executing a 
number of projects in developing and least-developed 
countries. Under such initiatives, number of Centers of 
Excellence in IT, IT Parks, Capacity Building Institutes, 
telemedicine & tele-education facilities, e-networks 
have been established. The following projects are under 
execution and initiated during the year:
1.	
High-performance 
Computing: 
India 
and 
EU launched a joint call for proposal on HPC 
applications under the signed Intent of Cooperation 
(IoC) on High Performance Computing (HPC), 
Weather Extremes & Climate Modeling and 
Quantum Technologies. 
2.	
India-Argentina 
Centre 
of 
Excellence 
in 
Information Technology (IA-CEIT) set up by 
C-DAC Delhi with financial assistance from the 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
International Cooperation
Annual
2024-2025
92
Government of India in the University of Hurlingham, 
Buenos Aires conducted a convocation ceremony. 
The ceremony witnessed the participation of the 
Argentine Minister of Education, Hon’ble Jaime 
Perczyk; Ambassador of India, H.E. Dinesh 
Bhatia; Rector of Hurlingham University, H.E. 
Walter Wallach. IA-CEIT was handed over to the 
University of Hurlingham on 5th Dec 2024 and has 
trained more than 800 participants. 
3.	
Centre of Excellence for Software Development 
and Training (CESDT) in Cambodia was 
established in Nov 2018. Training activities are 
currently going-on in Cambodia with the deputation 
of first CDAC expert in January 2024 for a period 
of 6 (six) months which is further extended for 
another six months i.e. till 15 Jan 2025 as per the 
request from Cambodian side. With the approval 
from Government of Cambodia three courses 
were launched at CESDT viz Certificate course 
in Network Administration, Certificate course in 
Cyber Security and Certificate course in Full Stack 
Development. A total of 330 students enrolled in 
these courses. 
4.	
India – Solomon Islands Centre of Excellence 
in IT (IS-CEIT) setup by C-DAC Delhi with financial 
assistance from the Government of India located 
at SINU Honiara was made Operational. IS-CEIT 
specializes in delivering holistic ICT domain 
training and seeks to raise awareness about the 
wealth of resources and expertise available at the 
center. IS-CEIT commenced classes on 6th March 
2024 for the Certificate courses in Information 
Technology and Data Analysis, for students, 
working professionals, and nominated Government 
officials. 
5.	
India – Vanuatu Centre of Excellence in IT (IV-
CEIT) set up by CDAC Delhi at Vanuatu Institute 
of Technology (VIT) Port Vila with financial 
assistance from the Government of India. The CoE 
was inaugurated on 11th June 2024 by the Hon’ble 
President of Vanuatu, Mr. Nikenike Vurobaravu 
along with H.E. High Commissioner of India to New 
Zealand (accredited to Vanuatu). CEIT in Vanuatu 
is offering courses in Micro Qualification course in 
Office Automation and Micro Qualification course 
in Information Technology is underway at CEIT in 
Vanuatu. The accreditation process for the Diploma 
in Java Programming course is under process in 
Vanuatu Qualification Authority. 
6.	
Vietnam Centre of Excellence in Software 
Development and Training (CESDT) setup by 
C-DAC Delhi at Posts and Telecommunications 
Institute of Technology (PTIT) was inaugurated by 
Ambassador of India to Vietnam in Ho Chi Minh on 
27th November 2024. CESDT is setup by C-DAC 
Delhi with the financial assistance under ASEAN – 
India Cooperation Fund.

CHAPTER
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
93
5.1	
Creation of Research Eco-System
5.1.1	 National Supercomputing Mission (NSM) & 
High-Performance Computing (HPC)
Under National Supercomputing Mission (NSM), approved 
by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in 
2015 and being executed within the framework of ‘Digital 
India’, C-DAC is engaged in indigenous R&D in petascale 
computing systems encompassing HPC components 
(including HPC processor, server board, interconnect, 
cluster, cooling system), HPC System Software, HPC 
Applications, HPC Solutions and Services. Under 
NSM, it is mandated to design and develop Indigenous 
supercomputers targeted at the exascale ecosystem in 
a phased manner from “Assembly” to “Manufacturing” 
to “Design and Manufacturing” of HPC systems and 
deploy petascale computing systems across the country. 
NSM has also equipped HPC enabled workforce to 
cater to ‘Skill India’ scheme. The mission also aims at 
‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’ in HPC for undertaking inventions 
by the scientific community and industry of the country.
5.1.1.1	 HPC Systems Deployed under NSM
As of December 2024, under Phase-1, Phase-2, 
and Phase-3 of NSM, C-DAC has deployed 33 
supercomputing systems, providing a total compute 
power of 32 Petaflops (PF). These systems, distributed 
across IITs, IISc, CDAC, and other R&D labs, support 
a variety of research initiatives. With the addition of 
six new systems, including a 20PF National facility at 
CDAC Bangalore, the total supercomputing capacity 
will soon reach 64 Petaflops. On 26th September, 2024 
Hon’ble Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi dedicated 
three PARAM Rudra Supercomputers to the nation 
via video conferencing. These supercomputers, are 
installed at the Inter-University Accelerator Centre 
(IUAC) in New Delhi (3 PetaFlops), the Giant Metrewave 
Radio Telescope (GMRT) at the National Centre for 
Radio Astrophysics (NCRA) in Pune (1 PetaFlop), and 
the S. N. Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences in 
Kolkata (838 TeraFlops). These supercomputers are 
built using indigenously designed and manufactured 
High Performance Computing servers, known as 
“Rudra,” along with a locally developed software stack. 
The PARAM Rudra Supercomputers will significantly 
enhance research capabilities for young scientists in 
India, facilitating advanced studies in physics, earth 
sciences, and cosmology.
Unveiling of three “Param Rudra” supercomputers 
at IUAC New Delhi, GMRT-TIFR Pune, SN Bose NCBS 
Kolkata by Prime Minister Narendra Modi
Param Utkarsh at C-DAC Bengaluru is being used for 
Design Linked Incentive (DLI), Chip to Startup (C2S), 
Meghdoot Cloud, AI for cyber security and many other 
industries. PARAM Siddhi at C-DAC Pune is being used 
by many start-ups involved in varied applications of AI-
ML. 
Significant number of components utilized in building 
Phase-3 systems are designed, manufactured, and 
assembled locally. These include C-DAC’s Rudra servers, 
DCLC and HPC Software Stack developed indigenously. 
A wide range of applications from Scientific, Engineering, 
Innovate and 
Design in India
5

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
94
Finance and Data Science domains are optimized and 
scaled for underneath architecture/ processor. The 
systems are accessed by 10000+ active researchers 
and academicians from 220+ institutes across the 
country on Nation Knowledge Network (NKN). More than 
one crore jobs have been executed on these systems 
by 1,500+ PhD students who, in turn, have published 
1,200+ research papers in leading journals in India and 
overseas. 
5.1.1.2	 Indigenous HPC Technologies under NSM
Rudra-I server
C-DAC’s, indigenously designed Rudra-I server platform 
is targeted for Hyperscale Data Centers in addition to HPC, 
Cloud, Edge computing and Communication. It is poised 
to ensure India’s self-sufficiency to design, develop and 
deliver as per country’s needs. It has an edge in security 
conscious environments and businesses. Performance 
of HPC applications on Rudra-1 is found to be at par with 
clusters with commercial servers elsewhere. All Rudra 
systems under Phase-3 are based on Rudra-I server.  
C-DAC has built a Rudra -1 based 1 PF pilot system 
in Open19 form factor and inhouse developed Network 
Interface Card Trinetra, Nvidia GPU cards A100, 
Mellanox InfiniBand Switch and Open19 Delta Power 
shelf. 
C-DAC partnered with M/s VVDN Technologies, M/s 
Kaynes Technologies and Avalon with technology 
transfer of server design for proliferating Rudra servers 
in the commercial server market. C-DAC has signed 
contract with M/s VVDN Technologies and M/s Kaynes 
Technology for the production of 6000 Rudra-I servers 
for phase-3 systems.
Rudra-II server
C-DAC’s RUDRA-II is based on Intel’s (Sapphire Rapids/ 
Emerald Rapids processor). It supports next-gen 
industry-standard technologies such as PCIe 5.0, HBM & 
DDR5 memory speeds of up to 5600MT. It is compatible 
with Open Compute Platform (OCP) 48V DC for Cloud/ 
Data center. For cooling, it has option of both liquid 
(better energy efficiency) and air cooling. The server is 
designed with interfaces required for HPC system and in 
small form factor.
Rudra-II Base Board Layout
Rudra-II Server assembly consists of 3 Cards: Base 
Board (BB) carries processors, memory, Clock, PCIe 
gen5 connectivity and other control logic, Controller 
Board (CB) carries Chipset and BMC logic and Power 
Distribution Board (PDB) comprises of Power distribution 
logic. The Mechanical Design for Rudra-II is carried out 
considering efficient utilization of space and effective 
thermal design.  
5.1.1.3	 Trinetra Interconnect
C-DAC’s Trinetra interconnect development is aimed 
at Indigenous exascale network design, allowing for 
scalability to hundreds of thousands of compute nodes, 
without the need for dedicated switching hardware. 
It consists of Trinetra-A (currently in production), and 
Trinetra-B (Under development). The interconnect has 
complex chip design (NCC: Network Controller chip), 
Platform design (PCB development), and Lightweight 
Protocol networking software design. 
Trinetra-A is based on PCI-e Gen3 host interface, and 
100 Gigabits physical link layer. It uses six 100 Gbps links 
to realize a 3D torus topology. The topology is scalable 
to large number of compute nodes. The software stack 
allows application interface, based on standards to run 
HPC applications seamlessly.  
PARAM Rudra - Trinetra-A Cluster

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
95
PARAM Rudra – Trinetra-A cluster comprises of 24 
nodes based on Rudra-I server, Trinetra-A 100Gbps (2 
x 2 x 6) network, Trinetra software stack and AlmaLinux 
release 8.9 (Midnight Oncilla). Trinetra network was 
validated on this cluster using various benchmarks/ 
applications.
Trinetra-B is based on PCI-e Gen3 host interface and 
200Gbps physical link layer technology. The design uses 
10 such links to realize ‘Supercluster’ topology which 
is an improvement over 3D Torus used by Trinetra-A. 
Prototype of Trinetra-B hardware has been completed 
successfully. Aggregate throughput from Trinetra-B 
physical link layer is 2 Terabits/sec, full duplex. 
5.1.1.4 C-DAC Storage Server Appliance
C-DAC has designed Rudra I based Object Storage 
Appliance (Mk1) to offer an optimal blend of flash 
performance and capacity. The appliance features 
a dual-processor setup (Rudra-1 server based) that 
maximizes SSD performance and includes a remote 
DMA feature to enhance throughput. It is equipped with 
a redundant power supply to ensure high availability, 
achieving sequential read and write speeds of 80 Gbps 
and random read and write speeds of 2,500 KIOPS.
C-DAC has developed an Object storage software system 
by deploying DAOS system. This is an open-source 
software-defined scale-out object store which provides 
high bandwidth and high IOPS storage containers to 
applications. This also enables next-generation data-
centric workflows combining simulation, data analytics, 
and machine learning. 
5.1.1.5	 Development of HPC based applications for 
national need under NSM
Early warning system for flood prediction (EWS-FP) 
in river basins of India
A geospatial portal SimInu (Simulation of Inundation) 
was developed to disseminate early warning information 
on flood prediction to disaster managers, enabling them 
to make timely & informed decisions. It boasts of a 
significant lead time of around 2 hours to forecast flood for 
the next 48 hours. Flood forecast (inundation and water 
level) information is available on-click over the interactive 
map. The Odisha State Water Resources Department 
has been utilizing this portal during the 2024 monsoon 
season to gain a comprehensive understanding of the 
flood situation. The Central Water Commission has also 
commended the product for its utility and ease of use.
A HPC Software Suite for Seismic Imaging to aid Oil 
& Gas Exploration (SeisRTM) – 3.0
SeisRTM is capable of producing high resolution 
2D and 3D seismic images of complex geological 
subsurface using acquired large seismic data. It is 
optimized using Boundary wavefield saving (BSRTM), 
Nyquist upscaling of cross-correlation frequency, depth 
resampling and partial snapshot storage. SeisRTM 3.0 
includes GUI, visualization of data, TTI RTM, 3D RTM, 
utility development for 3D. Land and marine data are 
processed using 3D utility. The pre-processing utility 
includes geometry creation, muting of shot gathers, 
interpolation of velocity model etc. The post-processing 
utility includes shallow noise removal, ray tracing-based 
muting, stacking of shot image gathers etc. 
Simulation Lab and Science Based Decision Support 
Framework to Address Urban Environment Issues 
A visualization portal developed visualizes the daily 
forecast of meteorological conditions and heat wave 
events in five urban cities. The portal is used to visualize 
weather, air quality, and hydrology-related parameters 
from 
operational 
models 
and 
various 
available 
observational data. 
High-resolution WRF model data is automatically 
extracted. The coupled Hydro-Met modeling Simulation 
platform is used for Quasi Operational Flood forecasting 
for Pune and Bengaluru Flood Events. Daily flood forecast 
based on model simulated rainfall and reservoirs water 
release information is automatically modeled and shared 
with DM cell, PMC, and WRD authorities for inundation 
details. 
5.1.1.6	 Application 
Porting, 
Optimization 
and 
Scaling
More than 300 applications/ libraries/ tools in Molecular 
dynamics, Material science, Computational chemistry, 
Weather prediction, CFD, Bioinformatics, AI-ML, and 
other domains were deployed and acceptance tests 
were completed on HPC systems at multiple sites. These 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
96
systems are maintained by a dedicated team and kept 
98% up for effective use by the end-uses.
5.1.1.7	 Human Resource Development under NSM
Under NSM HRD, C-DAC has provided training on 
HPC by conducting faculty development programs 
(FDPs), creating MOOC content, and hosting targeted 
workshops, hackathons, and bootcamps. Against the 
original commitment, C-DAC has trained more than 
23000 personnel on niche areas like HPC, AL/ML/DL 
till date. Under an MOU with AICTE, knowledge in the 
area of HPC technologies was imparted to faculties and 
students in AICTE-affiliated institutes. C-DAC has trained 
200 master trainers who will conduct FDPs nationwide, 
enabling faculties to teach HPC courses (SANKLAP). 
5.1.1.8	 International Association
C-DAC has become an affiliate member of Accelerated 
Data Analytics and Computing Institute (ADAC) during 
2023. C-DAC has also become an affiliate member 
of “High Performance Software Foundation (HPSF)” 
launched during ISC High Performance Conference, 
2024. 
5.1.2	 R&D and IP Development
5.1.2.1	 Convergence, Communications & Broadband 
Technologies (CC&BT) 
CC&BT has continued to play a pivotal role a key enabler 
of technologies for economic growth and development, 
facilitating India’s journey towards digital transformation. 
The previous years have witnessed significant strides in 
R&D efforts in the domain of cutting-edge Communication 
and Broadband Technologies, with a clear focus on 
empowering citizens with pervasive access to digital 
services across a multitude of use cases and verticals. 
The R&D efforts within the CC&BT group, MeitY aim 
to achieve several key objectives. These objectives 
include fostering R&D activities in CC&BT and Strategic 
Electronics, with a strong emphasis on collaborative 
initiatives involving academic and research institutions, 
user organizations, industry, and international partners. 
Furthermore, the Group strives to promote the 
commercialization of the developed technologies. It 
also plays a pivotal role in providing essential technical 
insights and support to various ministries, departments, 
and 
organizations, 
including 
the 
Department 
of 
Telecommunications (DoT), TRAI, Telecom Standards 
Development, Society of India (TSDSI), the Department 
of Science and Technology (DST), C-DOT, Telecom 
Centers of Excellence (TCOE), the Ministry of I&B, 
the Department of Space, and the Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BIS). These efforts collectively contribute to 
the growth and advancement of the digital technology 
landscape in India.
In alignment with the ever-evolving digital landscape, 
our relentless pursuit of R&D initiatives in CC&BT, 
and Strategic Electronics has been instrumental in 
nurturing indigenous capabilities. These initiatives 
have been centered around critical areas such as 
Next Generation Networks (NGN) and Communication 
technologies, Broadband Wireless Technologies, Green 
Communications, Quantum Communication, Vehicular 
Communication, Cyber Physical Systems, AI-enabled 
Communication, Big Data Analytics, and Internet of 
Things (IoTs) for societal applications and disaster 
management. Furthermore, Machine to-Machine (M2M) 
Communication and Strategic Electronics have emerged 
as instrumental components in both civil and defense 
domains, along with innovative backhaul communication 
technologies.
The R&D projects remain dedicated to creating intellectual 
property, leading to valuable patents, the design of 
innovative algorithms to enhance product development, 
and the development of prototypes that provide a 
head start in the pursuit of technological solutions and 
prototypes. The outputs stemming from these projects 
are poised to make substantial contributions in achieving 
the goals set forth by the ‘Make in India’ and ‘Digital India’ 
initiatives of the Government of India. 
In the continued endeavor to foster indigenous 
capabilities in Next Generation Communications and 
Convergence technologies, focus extends to a diverse 
range of innovations, including massive multiple-input-
multiple-output (MIMO), MAC and PHY SoC for Low 
Power and Long Range Networks, Metro Area Quantum 
Access Network (MAQAN) and its Network management 
innovation and experimentation, MMW Radiometer for 
NE Region of India. Additionally, emphasis is laid on ICT 

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
97
applications in strategic sectors, Broadband Wireless 
Access Technologies, Visible Light Communication 
(VLC), Vehicular ad-hoc Networks (VANET), IP-
based products and services, electromagnetic wave 
applications, high-power RF/microwave tubes, Terahertz 
(THz) wireless systems, and Radar Systems etc. 
The significance of R&D initiatives lies in their potential 
to propel the nation into the next wave of digital 
transformation. These efforts underscore an unwavering 
commitment in advancing the frontiers of technology, 
promoting innovation, and fostering growth, thereby 
reinforcing India’s position as a leader in the global digital 
landscape. The mission continues to be firmly rooted 
in pioneering breakthroughs that enhances the digital 
ecosystem and bolster the nation’s position on the global 
stage. 
Projects contributing to 6G: Over the past two decades, 
MeitY has supported projects including advanced 
technologies from 4G to 5G and Beyond, including 
6G, contributing significantly to global standards and 
technology prototypes. This played a crucial role in 
introduction of usage scenario of “Ubiquitous connectivity” 
for IMT-2030(6G) by India in the WP5D meeting held at 
Geneva in June 2023. 
This usage scenario, coupled with the new capability of 
coverage, enables the development of 6G technologies. 
Substantial efforts, including the formulation of proposals 
like Extreme MIMO, 6G Satcom and New Waveforms 
have been undertaken, and these contributions have 
been integrated into the 6G Vision document. 
The vision of Bharat 6G Mission is to contribute 
significantly to 6G standards and intellectual property, 
with the goal 10% of the standard essential IP in 6G to 
achieve 6G-self-reliant powered nation.
The following ongoing projects aligns with the above 
vision:
•	
Next 
Generation 
Wireless 
Research 
and 
Standardization on 5G and Beyond
•	
6G End-to-End Communication System
•	
6G: Sub-THz Wireless Communication with 
Intelligent Reflecting Surfaces (IRS)
Next Generation Wireless Research and Standard-
ization on Fifth Generation (5G) and Beyond Tech-
nologies: 
The imminent 5G and the future 6G wireless technologies 
have the potential to make a major societal transformation 
in India by enabling massive digital products aligned with 
the goals of the Government of India like the Make in India, 
Digital India and Atmanirbhar Bharat. “Next Generation 
Wireless Research and Standardization on 5G and 
Beyond” project was initiated with a broad objective 
to conduct collaborative research in the broadband 
wireless communication areas leading to standardization 
of 5G and Beyond technologies by utilizing the expertise 
available within the country. Further, the research 
outcomes have been taken to various standard bodies like 
3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU), Telecommunications 
Standards Development Society, India (TSDSI), Institute 
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), etc. 
to contribute to evolving the technologies for 5G and 
beyond including 6G technologies. 
• 
Significant contributions have been made to 
3GPP toward the development of 5G-Advanced 
Technologies and these have been incorporated 
into the ongoing releases of 5G standards.
•	
Discussions with global stakeholders, including 
academia 
and 
industry, 
are 
shaping 
the 
development of 6G technologies and contributions 
will be submitted at the 3GPP plenary meetings.
•	
Indian 
researchers 
from 
leading 
institutions 
such as IIT Hyderabad, CEWiT IIT Madras, IIT 
Madras, IISc Bangalore, and IIT Kanpur, alongside 
technical experts from private companies, have 
contributed to defining performance requirements 
and evaluation methodologies for IMT-2030 
(International Mobile Telecommunications). These 
contributions are pivotal for evaluating technology 
requirements that address performance needs in 
the development of 6G.
•	
The focus of the research is to ensure that the 
ensuing 6G technologies provide affordable 
connectivity and broadband services, especially 
in rural and underserved areas. This entails 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
98
concentrating on low-power consumption, reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions, and adopting circular 
economy practices to promote sustainability and 
contribute to the achievement of the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
6G 
End-to-End 
Communication 
System: 
The 
main aim of the project is to develop fundamental 
technological innovations and solutions in two important 
areas i.e., the maximization of Network coverage & 
range at high operational frequencies and Development 
of wireless technology that offers extremely high data 
rates and extremely low latency that offers near wireline 
(fibre) experience. In this regard, the system hardware-
firmware architecture prototypes have been completed 
and the design and development of a 6G NR modem 
is currently in progress. The modem uses the OTFDM 
waveform, which has been specifically chosen to align 
with the ITU WP 5D IMT 2030 requirements for 6G 
networks. This ensures the modem meets the high-
performance standards necessary for next-generation 
wireless communication. 
A key achievement in the project so far is the successful 
transmission of a 200 MHz OTFDM-modulated signal 
using the 26GHz RF, demonstrating the system’s 
capability for high-speed, high-efficiency communication 
at these advanced frequencies.
Further, the team is developing the 6G NR modem 
to unlock the full potential of 6G technology. After 
completing these key milestones, the development of 
relay prototype chains will begin, with a demonstration.
6G: 
Sub-THz 
Wireless 
Communication 
with 
Intelligent Reflecting Surfaces (IRS): The objective of 
this new technology demonstration project is to exhibit 
a fully functional 6G high speed communication link 
at 140 GHz under the Atma Nirbhar Bharat mission. 
SAMEER is executing this project with IIT Madras as a 
consortium member. SAMEER Kolkata has indigenously 
developed the D-band transmitter, receiver and lens 
antenna exclusively for this communication link. 
SAMEER successfully exhibited a Line-of-Sight (LOS) 
link at 140 GHz using the baseband signal generated 
by IIT Madras. SAMEER demonstrated 6G 6.4 Gbps 
Data Transmission in India Mobile Congress 2024. This 
kind of high frequency high speed wireless data link 
has been demonstrated for the first time in India with all 
indigenously developed components.
 
6G LOS communication link demonstration at  
India Mobile Congress 2024
6G antennas and components were also demonstrated 
during the “Digital India Future Labs” event in Delhi 
organized by MeitY in February 2024.
Indian Open Source Software Platform for an end-to-
end 5G Networks (IOS-5GN)
This project aims to create an End-to-End 3GPP & 
Open Radio Access Network (O-RAN) compliant Open-
Source 5G Software Platform, to provide commercial-
grade open software platform that enables startups 
and companies to focus on their unique innovations 
rather than duplicating common software components, 
and to provide deep technical support to the industry in 
developing solutions. This will enable vendors to rapidly 
use, customize, make derivative works and thereby 
create mobile communication (5G/6G) products and 
services for Indian markets. The project is being jointly 
executed by Foundation for Innovation and Technology 
Transfer (FITT) of IIT Delhi, Foundation for Science 
Innovation and Development (FSID) of IISc, Bangalore, 
and CDAC-Thiruvananthapuram. 
Solution Architecture

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
99
Hon’ble Secretary, MeitY at CDAC  
Booth at IMC 2024
The first release of the software in GitHub involves 5G 
Radio Access Network (RAN) software, 5G Core (5GC) 
Software, Service Management and Orchestration (SMO) 
software to interwork with Lekha Wireless Solutions and 
VVDN technologies 7.2 Fronthaul (FH) n78 indoor Radio 
Units. More than 10 test beds across IISc, CDAC and 
IIT Delhi have been setup for enhancing test coverage 
through manual or automated testing. In lab conditions, 
data transfer speed of up to 900 Mbps on Core using 
standalone SD-Core testing with RAN simulators and up 
to 600 Mbps downlink and 50 Mbps uplink on RAN in 
an end-to-end setup with 2x2 split 7.2x Radio Unit (RU), 
gNB, and SD-Core transmitting wirelessly to a mobile 
phone were achieved. Four commercial User Equipment 
(UE) tests with RAN and Core for more than 24 hours in 
lab have been achieved. An Outdoor Radio Unit (ORU) 
simulator-based testbed for automated traffic model 
tests has been established. Configuration management 
of Core and RAN through SMO has been completed.
Design of Dynamic MAC and PHY SoC for Low Power 
and Long Range Networks: The project has successfully 
implemented and tested the IEEE 802.15.4:2020 
standard on ARM M4 processor (nRF52840) and also 
implemented an out-of-tree module on GNU radio 
(ADF7242 and ADF7030) covering MAC features based 
on IEEE 802.15.4:2020 TSCH MAC Standard.
Implementation of TSCH MAC using ARM M4 processor 
and GNU radio
Tape-out of an RF front for receiver using sub sampling 
has been successfully implemented and tested. Further, 
two IEEE transaction and conference papers are also 
published on the same.
	
(a) Characterization	
(b) Full-chip 
	
board and microphotograph
(c) Measurement setup
Development and testing of a low-power digital baseband 
at 2.4 GHz on FPGA using the beacon, MAC command 
and Data frame provided in the IEEE 802.15.4:2020 
standard has been completed.  The Physical testing and 
GDSII of developed digital baseband phase-1 is also 
completed and the test set-up for the same is also shown 
in the below Figure. 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
100
 
Test set-up for Digital Baseband Phase I
Further, tape-out and successful testing of the subblocks 
of the RF front end have been conducted. The team 
has published 2 IEEE transactions, 2 IEEE international 
conference papers and 2 MDPI journals based on the 
work done.  
Development of signal and channel models, circuits, 
and antennas for Next Generation wireless systems 
with emphasis on vehicular communication
Millimetre wave (mmWave) research in India is still 
in its early stages. The objective of the project is to 
design and develop integrated circuits for mmWave 
communication, establishing mmWave characterization 
facilities and building expertise in Complementary 
Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (CMOS) - based mmWave 
design and implementation. The focus is on designing, 
implementing, and characterizing CMOS mmWave 
circuits and systems, specifically targeting the n260 
band (37–40 GHz). Two complete Transmitter (Tx) – 
Receiver (Rx) front-ends consisting of a power amplifier 
(PA), low noise amplifier (LNA) and Transmitter switch 
were designed in 65nm CMOS process, fabricated and 
tested. A transceiver consisting of PA, LNA, Transmit/
Receive switch, mixer, Intermediate Frequency (IF) 
amplifier, phase shifter, Local Oscillator (LO) buffer and 
In-phase and Quadrature (IQ) generation circuit has 
been designed and fabricated and testing is in progress.
Chip Micrograph of complete  
T/R Front End at 39GHz
Chip Micrograph of Injection locked  
oscillator at 39 GHz 
Chip Micrograph of Phased Array at 39GHz
5G+/6G Converged Terrestrial and Satellite IOT (5G+/6G-
sIoT): The project has made significant advancements 
in Satcom and terrestrial communication convergence, 
achieving key milestones such as developing 3GPP Rel-
17compliant Satcom IoT systems. L-band NB-IoT SoC 
to support GEO satellites has also been successfully 
developed which enables a plethora of low-bit rate 
satellite IoT applications.
Furthermore, the project has contributed to the ITU 
WP 5D IMT-2030 Framework Document by integrating 
Satcom as a key interworking feature in IMT-2030. The 
notable achievements include the development of link 
and system simulators, integration of NB-IoT features, 
successful π/2-BPSK waveform simulations, and the 
completion of L2/L3 for 5G NR NTN gNB and UE. 
Additionally, the team has enhanced its 5G base station 
(BS) and user equipment (UE) testbeds to support 
Satcom by designing advanced L1/L2/3 algorithms 
and protocols and has successfully filed 17 patents 
focused on advancements in 5G terrestrial and non-
terrestrial technologies. These patents cover areas such 
as waveforms, physical layer (PHY) enhancements, 
scheduler features, and more.

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
101
Quantum Communication:
Quantum communication applies quantum principles in 
order to communicate via the transmission of quantum 
states. It is a field of applied quantum physics, closely 
related to quantum information processing and quantum 
teleportation, with the primary application of creating 
ultra-secure communication networks and quantum 
cryptography. Quantum communications use photons to 
transmit qubits between remote places. This is because 
photons are very well isolated from perturbations, which 
translates into long-lived superposition states for photonic 
qubits. It can propagate with low attenuation (down to 0.2 
dB/km at 1.55 μm) in optical fibers. 
Metro Area Quantum Access Network (MAQAN): 
The project is a pioneering initiative aimed at developing 
India’s first multipoint Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) 
network and R&D testbed over existing optical fibres. This 
indigenous effort focuses on creating hardware, firmware, 
and software to enable quantum-secure communication. 
Starting in March 2021, MAQAN now operates in a 
five-node topology across Chennai, connecting IIT 
Madras, ERNET, SETS, and NIC. For over 80 days, it 
has successfully generated secure cryptographic keys 
using Coherent-One-Way (CoW) and Differential Phase 
Shift (DPS) protocols. The project integrates SDN-
enabled management through the DARPAN-Q platform 
and acts as a testbed for evaluating QKD protocols and 
post-quantum cryptography. This marks a significant 
milestone in advancing India’s capabilities in secure 
communications, leveraging the principles of quantum 
mechanics for unmatched security.
MAQAN Links
Quantum communication using entangled photons: 
The objective of this project is to establish secure 
communication between a sender (Alice) and a receiver 
(Bob) through public channel between two buildings 
using quantum communication techniques. Entangled 
photons are transmitted through free space to allow both 
parties to securely share a quantum key. The sender 
uses this key to encrypt a message before sending it 
over a public communication channel and the receiver 
decrypts the message using the shared quantum 
key to retrieve its original message. The laboratory 
setup has been successfully established at Society for 
Applied Microwave Electronics Engineering & Research 
(SAMEER), Mumbai.
Basis Choice and Polarization Measurement Unit 
Free Space Photon Transmission
Design Studies of High-Power RF Amplifiers and 
Development of Antennae for mm-wave backhaul/ 
fronthaul Connectivity for 5G
5G enables ultra-fast data speeds and near-instant 
response times using millimeter waves (mmWave), 
which offer high data capacity but have limited range and 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
102
are easily obstructed. High-power Radio Frequency (RF) 
amplifiers address these challenges by boosting signals 
for seamless backhaul and fronthaul communication.
This project focuses on optimizing high-power RF 
amplifiers for mmWave applications in the V-band and 
these solutions are vital for rural areas, bridging the 
digital divide and supporting essential services like 
healthcare, education, and e-governance. Channel 
models which predict signal behavior to determine the 
required RF power and bandwidth, balancing output, 
efficiency, and challenges like path loss and interference 
were carried out. High-power, wideband linear amplifiers 
were designed. Printed patch antennas on Rogers 
substrate and low temperature co-fired ceramic (LTCC) 
antennas for point-to-multipoint (fronthaul) and point-to-
point (backhaul) connectivity and conical horn antenna 
for point-to-point (backhaul) connectivity were fabricated.
Fabricated antenna prototype with  
high frequency connector
Fabricated antenna prototype for  
MIMO Implementation
Designed Conical horn antenna
Design of Efficient and Secure Internet-of-Things 
(IoT) Communication Framework in Context of 
Content-Centric Network (CCN) using Elliptic Curve 
Cryptography (ECC) – A Next-Generation Smart 
Communication Technology: The following have been 
developed under the project:
1.	
ECC-Based Secure Handshake Protocol for 
Multicasting in CCN-IoT Environment is designed 
for secure communication in IoT data broadcasting 
and multicasting.
Handshake Protocol for Multicasting
2.	
Content-Centric Network-based Internet of Medical 
Things for Remote Patient Monitoring is developed 
for smart health monitoring in Content-Centric 
Networking (CCN).
IoMT for Remote Patient Monitoring
3. 
An 
Efficient 
Authentication 
and 
Content 
Dissemination Scheme for CCN-based IoMT in 
Remote Health Monitoring System is designed for 
secure remote healthcare management system 
integrated with CCN-based IoT and edge devices.

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
103
Content Dissemination Scheme for CCN-based IoMT
4.	
A CCN-based Proper Naming Scheme using Colon 
Classification and an ECC-based lightweight real-
time CCN- IoT Protocol is developed for IoT data 
management.
5.	
Provably 
Secure 
Three 
Factor 
Based 
Authentication Framework in CCN-Based IoT with 
Edge Architecture is designed for secure content 
delivery between consumers and edge devices, 
featuring efficient content caching.
6.	
WIRTinX Subnetworks for 6G communication in 
the context of ICN is developed for a secure and 
efficient communication protocol for ICN-WinXS 
incorporating a privacy-preserving naming scheme.
7.	
All the designed communication protocols have 
been tested using AVISPA simulator and it is found 
to be safe from various network security threats 
and attacks. Further, the practical implementation 
aspects of all the developed schemes are being 
verified in the ndnSIM Network Simulator running 
on an Ubuntu workstation having Intel Xeon Gold 
6226R 32 cores CPU @ 2.9 GHz with 384 GB 
RAM.  
Establishment of EMC test facility for testing of 
strategic electronics systems: This initiative aims 
to set up an EMC testing facility in Maharashtra to 
support the Military, Navy, Air Force, and commercial 
manufacturers across India’s western zone. With 70% of 
defence production shifting to indigenous development, 
India’s limited MIL-STD testing facilities result in a 6–8 
month waiting period for defence manufacturers. This 
project will boost Maharashtra and the nation due to 
the presence of defence hubs and the Western Naval 
Command in the region. SAMEER currently offers limited 
MIL testing for manufacturers from Pune, Nasik, and 
Aurangabad, who otherwise travel to southern regions 
like Chennai for compliance testing due to the absence 
of an EMC facility in the western zone.
The test facility will offer NABL-accredited compliance 
testing including Shielded Anechoic  Chamber (10 m) 
with fully lined ferrite-tiled and hybrid absorbers meeting 
the all requirements  of CISPR 16-1-4/5, IEC 61000-5-X 
standard and MIL-STD 461 F for full compliance EMI/
EMC.
The project has progressed with all necessary statutory 
clearances, including environmental, fire, and Airport 
Authority approvals, allowing civil activities to commence. 
The City and Industrial Development Corporation of 
Maharashtra (CIDCO) has issued the commencement 
certificate for the construction of the chamber and 
laboratories. The Central Public Works Department 
(CPWD) awarded the civil structure contract to M/s. 
National Construction and construction have begun on-
site. 
 
10 m Anechoic Chamber (right) and EMC  
Test Facility inside Chamber (left)
Development of MMW Radiometer for NE Region of 
India for Climate modelling studies for weather changes: 
A millimetre wave, ground-based passive radiometer 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
104
system has been developed in-house for unattended, 
time-contiguous 
measurement 
of 
tropospheric 
temperature and humidity profiles in the atmosphere (~ 
10 km).
Statistical (Machine learning-regressor and neural 
network-based) 
and 
Physical 
modelling 
(Optimal 
estimation, 1D-Var model) based Inverse model was 
developed for retrieval of Temperature and humidity 
profiles. 
MM- Wave radiometer (left) and the retrieved profiles 
for Temperature and comparison with sample Predicted 
using the random forest ML model (right)      
Analysis, Design and Implementation of Intelligent 
Reflecting 
Surfaces 
(IRS) 
Assisted 
Wireless 
Communication Systems: The IRSs are man-made 
surfaces (generally the meta-surfaces consisting of 
several meta-atoms) of electromagnetic (EM) material 
and have unique wireless communication capabilities 
and are aimed to control the propagation environment 
intentionally and deterministically to boost the signal 
quality at the receiver. These surfaces can be controlled 
electronically to focus the EM energy at the receiver. 
In essence, an IRS intelligently configures the wireless 
environment to help the transmissions between the 
sender and receiver, when direct communication is not 
possible or is of poor quality.
The project achieved milestones including high-quality 
publications, a functional RIS panel capable of beam 
steering, and a successful demonstration of smooth 
video streaming with notable data rates and SINR. The 
prototype was showcased at the India Mobile Congress, 
highlighting its innovation and impact.
Indigenously developed RIS assisted  
wireless communication system
A Data-Centric Approach to Study Fundamental Limits of 
Communication in Adversarial Wireless Networks” jointly 
implemented by IIT Delhi and IIIT Delhi: The project 
aims to employ data-centric approaches to secure next-
generation networks from advanced adversaries.
The wireless testbed has been developed at IIT Delhi 
and is designed to detect two types of attack adversaries: 
(i) Reactive adversaries with victim monitoring capability, 
and (ii) Reactive adversaries with impersonation 
capability. The testbed includes a generated dataset, 
an algorithm for attack detection, and the testbed 
infrastructure itself to demonstrate the effectiveness of 
Federated Learning in mitigating these security threats.
Testbed at IIT Delhi: Depiction of Adlam Pluto devices in 
our lab setting that are used to play the  
role of Alice, Dave and Bob

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
105
Testbed at IIT Delhi: Depiction of Xbee devices to play the 
role of base stations for implementing  
Federated Learning
On-chip Control of Polarization and Delay in Arrayed 
Waveguide Grating” implemented by IIT Indore: A 
platform for on-chip polarization control has been 
designed and optimized, demonstrating significant 
modal birefringence variation with rib thickness and 
biased voltages, achieving a change of 0.022 at 10 V for 
an 800 nm optimized waveguide. A nanophotonic ring 
resonator embedded in a hybrid plasmonic waveguide 
has been analyzed, presenting a comb-like structure 
that enables an ultra-large group delay. A chip-scale 
ring resonator with ITO-based vertical coupling has 
been developed to enhance nonlinear optical properties 
through electron heating, improving the refractive index 
and enabling high-speed optical data communication. 
Additionally, an AWG integrated with a ring resonator 
has been fabricated, achieving improved wavelength 
selectivity and a 5% reduction in crosstalk, with further 
work ongoing to develop an AWG with a shared free 
spectral region.
Schematic of the Developed AWG Device
Design and Development of a Millimeter-wave based Road 
Condition Detection Radar for Automotive Application 
implemented by TCE Madurai: The configuration and 
evaluation of mm-wave radar sensor boards and data 
capture boards were carried out to adapt the existing 
radar module to specific requirements. The integrated 
antenna and beamforming were simulated and tailored 
to effectively target road surfaces. Comprehensive 
theoretical analyses and simulations of signal processing 
algorithms, along with the development of enhanced 
data processing techniques, were performed to enable 
the radar to detect various road conditions, including 
potholes and speed breakers, under diverse climatic 
conditions. The integration of radar boards, data 
capture systems, and data processing was implemented 
on an Embedded C FPGA platform, with the output 
displayed on a Python-based GUI, followed by rigorous 
experimental evaluation. Additionally, a radome was 
designed, subjected to mechanical stress and vibration 
analysis, and developed to house the integrated radar 
system. The project culminated in the development of a 
complete end-to-end radar hardware prototype, which 
was experimentally validated on cars and two-wheelers 
across different environmental conditions.
5.1.2.2	 Artificial Intelligence & Emerging Technology 
Promoting 
the 
Adoption 
of 
Cutting-edge 
Technologies to Create Significant Economic and 
Societal Impact
India is now prepping for cutting-edge technologies 
including 5G, AI, blockchain, augmented reality & 
virtual reality, machine learning & deep learning, 
robots, natural language processing, etc. These will be 
critical in the government and industry, for planning or 
decision-making, expediting development or analyzing 
deployment, issue solving or product creation, detecting 
new trends or drawing out linkages and associations.
The Emerging Technologies Division of MeitY is 
responsible for fostering and promoting the utilization of 
cutting-edge technologies in the country. The Division is 
supporting work for policy/ strategy papers in emerging 
areas like AI, AR/VR, IoT, blockchain, robotics, computer 
vision, drones, etc.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
106
Initiatives by MeitY in Emerging Technologies
Centre of Excellence (CoE) for Internet of Things 
(IoTs) (Gandhinagar, Bengaluru, Gurugram & Vizag)
Under the Digital India initiatives, MeitY along with 
NASSCOM and state governments has set up CoE 
on IoTs at Bengaluru, Gurugram, Gandhi Nagar and 
Visakhapatnam. First Centre on IoT was established 
in Bengaluru in 2016 along with the Government of 
Karnataka and NASSCOM. One of the objectives of 
these centres is to enable India emerge as an innovation 
hub in IoT through democratization of innovation and 
realization of prototypes. The CoE, supported by 
Government and industry is a nationwide platform for 
innovation sandbox to enable technology adoption 
and innovation, and to develop a culture of cocreation 
in 
Industry 
4.0, 
manufacturing, 
automotive 
and 
transportation, life sciences and healthcare, Agriculture 
and other industry verticals and horizontals. More than 
490 startups have been enrolled, 102 societal projects 
have been undertaken, and 110 IPs filed.
Centre of Excellence on Virtual & Augmented 
Reality (VARCoE) at IIT Bhubaneswar
Virtual & Augmented Reality (AR&VR) have massive 
innovation potential across a wide range of industries 
and research elds. With an objective to explore the 
opportunities in this niche area, Software Technology 
Parks of India in partnership with MeitY, Government 
of Odisha, IIT Bhubaneshwar and a philanthropist has 
established Centre of Entrepreneurship for VARCoE at 
IIT Bhubaneswar. It undertakes world-class research, 
develop state-of-the art testing facility/ laboratories 
for advanced algorithms, applications and methods 
in aid of AR&VR for immersive visualization in areas 
including skill development, product design, healthcare, 
art & architecture, transport, construction, tourism, 
entertainment, 
education 
& 
productivity 
software. 
Presently nine major projects on AR&VR applications 
in various domains involving 15 highly qualified faculty 
and researchers of IIT Bhubaneshwar are in progress. 
VARCoE has also supported 26 startups so far.
Centre of Excellence on Gaming, VFX, Computer 
Vision & AI at Hyderabad
This CoE has been set up in collaboration with MeitY, 
STPI, the gaming industry and the Government of 
Telangana in Jan 2020 to provide resources such as 
mentoring, technology support and funding for gaming, 
animation, VFX, computer vision and AI start- ups. It 
others integrated programs, CVLAB and Game Lab 
for start-ups to scale up through its incubation facility. 
The centre has been branded as IMAGE. The IMAGE 
accelerator program includes premium plug and play 
coworking space for start-ups and others access to the 
ecosystem which comprises IP owners, mentors, seed 
funding, investors and a platform to support Go-To- 
Market strategy. At present 75 start-ups have been on-
boarded and so far,
Centre of Excellence on Blockchain Technology at 
Gurugram
The STPI APIARY, a Centre of Entrepreneurship in 
Blockchain Technology has been setup in collaboration 
with MeitY, STPI, Govt. of Haryana, Padup Venture 
Private Limited, IBM, Intel, GBA and FITT in March 2020. 
This is an initiative to identify and evaluate promising 
start-ups in the eld of Blockchain technology that will 
be hosted in the STPI Gurugram incubation facility. The 
CoE is created to be an Incubation-cum-Accelerator 
Programme through which acute challenges faced by 
start-ups from validation of idea to initial investment will 
be addressed. Total 37 start-ups have been onboarded 
and so far.
Design, Development and Deployment of National AI 
Portal (INDIAai)
INDIAai portal is a venture by MeitY that has been set 
up to prepare the nation for an AI future. This has been 
implemented as a one stop online portal for AI related 
developments in India, sharing of resources, details 
of start-ups, investment funds in AI, companies and 
educational institutions related to AI in India, etc. The 
portal also features the initiatives of the IndiaAI Mission. 
The portal currently has the following major sections - 
news, articles, case studies, research reports, listing of 
startups, listing of investment funds, colleges, companies, 
countries, people, videos, 
datasets, 
courses, 
and 
initiatives of states and central ministries. As of 
date, there are 3,590 articles, 1310 news, 366 videos, 
171 research reports, 511 startups, 151 case studies, 
and 172 government initiatives listed on the National AI 
Portal.

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
107
AI Research Analytics and Knowledge Dissemination 
Platform (AIRAWAT)
The Government has initiated a project AIRAWAT for 
providing a common compute platform for AI research 
and 
knowledge 
assimilation. 
This 
AI 
computing 
infrastructure will be used by all Technology Innovation 
Hubs, research labs, scientific community, industry, 
start- ups and institutions under the NKN. The PoC for 
AIRAWAT will be developed with 200 petaflops mixed 
precision AI machine which will be scalable to a peak 
compute of 790 AI petaflops.
The AIRAWAT has secured 75th position in Top 500 
Global Supercomputing List declared at International 
Supercomputing Conference (ISC 2023), Germany 
putting India on top of AI Supercomputing nations 
worldwide.
Formation of Inter-Ministerial Committee for De-
velopment of Robotics Ecosystem in the country
MeitY has constituted an inter-ministerial committee with 
secretaries from DoT, DSIR, DST, DPIIT and NITI Aayog 
as members and secretary, MeitY as the convener. The 
committee shall be studying the best practices on role 
of government in supporting their domestic robotics 
industry & suggest way forward to foster end-to-end 
ecosystem centred on robotics including research, 
design, manufacturing, prototyping and utilization in 
manufacturing.
Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence (GPAI)
GPAI 
is 
an 
international 
and 
multi-stakeholder 
initiative to guide the responsible development and 
use of AI, grounded in human rights, inclusion, diversity, 
innovation, and economic growth. India is a founding 
member of GPAI, having joined the multi-stakeholder 
initiative on June 15, 2020. Since then, India has 
significantly contributed to the GPAI goals and objectives 
and is working on various domestic initiatives for the 
responsible development, deployment, and adoption of 
AI. As one of the largest Global South economies leading 
the AI race, India nominated itself for the position of 
incoming council chair of GPAI. India received more than 
two-thirds of preference votes and was therefore elected 
as the Incoming Council Chair in November 2022. India 
served as the Incoming Chair in 2023, then subsequently 
Lead Chair in 2024.
The GPAI Mid-Year Summit was hosted in July 2024, 
which took place at Bharat Mandapam, New Delhi, 
brought together 12,000+ attendees including 10,000+ 
virtual attendees from over 50 countries including Global 
South across 12 sessions with 100+ high-level speakers 
from governments, multilateral organizations, industry, 
academia, civil society and other relevant stakeholders.
IndiaAI Mission
The Government of India has approved IndiaAI Mission on 
7th March 2024, a comprehensive national level program 
to democratize and catalyze the AI innovation ecosystem 
in the country and ensure the global competitiveness of 
India’s AI startups and researchers. The Mission aims 
to establish a robust AI ecosystem through strategic 
programs and partnerships across the public and private 
sectors. By democratizing computing access, improving 
data quality, developing indigenous AI capabilities, 
attracting top AI talent, enabling industry collaboration, 
providing startup risk capital, ensuring socially impactful AI 
projects and bolstering ethical AI, it will drive responsible, 
inclusive growth of India’s AI ecosystem. The Mission 
will be implemented by ‘IndiaAI’ Independent Business 
Division (IBD) under Digital India Corporation (DIC) 
and has the following components: IndiaAI Compute 
Capacity, IndiaAI Innovation Centre, IndiaAI Datasets 
Platform, IndiaAI Application Development Initiative, 
IndiaAI FutureSkills, IndiaAI Startup Financing, and Safe 
& Trusted AI. This Mission will propel innovation and 
build domestic capacities to ensure the tech sovereignty 
of India. It will also create highly skilled employment 
opportunities to harness the demographic dividend of 
the country and help India demonstrate to the world how 
this transformative technology can be used for social 
good and enhance its global competitiveness.
	
IndiaAI Compute: IndiaAI compute pillar envisions 
building a high-end scalable AI computing 
ecosystem comprising AI compute infrastructure of 
10,000 or more Graphics Processing Units (GPUs).
	
IndiaAI FutureSkills: IndiaAI FutureSkills Pillar 
envisions to augment the number of graduates, 
postgraduate and PhDs in AI domain. Further, it 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
108
envisions setting up Data and AI Labs in Tier 2 and 
Tier 3 cities across India, to impart foundational-
level courses in Data and AI. IndiaAI fellowships are 
being targeted annually to 400 B.Tech, 500 M.Tech 
and 100 PhD students working in AI domain from 
All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) 
recognized engineering institutions.
	
IndiaAI Startup Financing: IndiaAI Startup 
Financing pillar aims to provide support to AI 
startups at all stages.
	
IndiaAI Innovation Centre: IndiaAI Innovation 
centre aims to develop and deploy indigenous 
Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) trained on India-
specific data.
	
IndiaAI Datasets Platform: The IndiaAI Datasets 
Platform (IDP) seeks to enhance access, quality, 
and utilization of public sector datasets to make 
them AI-ready.
	
IndiaAI Applications Development Initiative: 
IndiaAI Application Development Initiative aims 
to develop, scale, and promote the adoption of 
impactful AI solutions to effectively tackle significant 
problem statements.
	
Safe & Trusted AI: Safe & Trusted pillar enables 
the implementation of Responsible AI projects 
including the development of indigenous tools 
and frameworks, self-assessment checklists for 
innovators, and other guidelines and governance 
frameworks. Eight Responsible AI Projects have 
been selected to address the need for robust 
guardrails to ensure the responsible development, 
deployment, and adoption of AI technologies. The 
projects cover a range of critical themes, including 
Machine Unlearning, Synthetic Data Generation, 
AI Bias Mitigation, Ethical AI Frameworks, Privacy- 
Enhancing Tools, Explainable AI, AI Governance 
Testing, and Algorithm Auditing Tools.
AI Governance Guidelines Development
The Government constituted an multi stakeholder 
Advisory Group under the chairmanship of the Principal 
Scientific Advisor (PSA) of India to provide guidance on 
AI governance and o-ering insights for the necessary 
regulatory oversight to enable sustainable and ethical 
development of AI technologies. Under the guidance of 
the Advisory Group, a Subcommittee on ‘AI Governance 
and Guidelines Development’ was constituted to provide 
actionable recommendations for AI governance in 
India. The Subcommittee has submitted its report. 
The Subcommittee’s report emphasizes the need for a 
coordinated, whole-of government approach to ensure 
e-ective compliance and enforcement as India’s AI 
landscape continues to evolve. The report has been kept 
for public consultation.
5.1.2.3 Quantum Technology: 
•	
Establishment 
of 
Superconducting 
based 
Quantum Computing Reference Facility: The 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY) initiated a project for “Establishment of 
Superconducting based Quantum Computing 
Reference 
Facility” 
to 
accelerate 
quantum 
technology 
R&D, 
capabilities 
and 
empower 
industry. This project aims to build a cutting-edge 
quantum computing facility at C-DAC, capable 
of handling advanced scientific and industrial 
problems using quantum technology. Setting up 
a powerful quantum computer with 50-100 qubits, 
along with the necessary supporting equipment 
like cooling systems, control electronics, and 
specialized software with cloud-based access 
for 
researchers 
and 
industry 
professionals, 
would enable them to run quantum experiments 
remotely. The project focuses on training hundreds 
of people, fostering collaboration with academic 
and industrial partners, and advancing India’s 
leadership in quantum technology research and 
innovation.
Reference Facility Set-Up

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
109
•	
Agile and Ad hoc Free Space based Quantum 
Communication using Drone (Drone-QC): MeitY 
has initiated a project on the Drone based Quantum 
Communication (D-QC), which is a potential 
candidate for reconfigurable aerial quantum 
nodes. The project will achieve indigenous design, 
development and demonstration of aerial payload 
including indigenous quantum pointing acquisition 
and tracking system for performing quantum 
communication on a moving platform (vehicle/
drone).   
	
This project will pave way for a state of art quantum 
technology demonstration bringing India amongst 
the front runners of quantum communication 
technology.  
	
The application domain will be free space quantum 
communication using Drones and Quantum optical 
relays. It can also serve as the last link for quantum 
satellites. The technology being developed will 
contribute to designing and developing application-
specific payloads. This will enable us to make 
a significant contribution to a wide range of 
technological advancements in India. 
Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) using Drone
•	
Design 
and 
Development 
of 
a 
Unified 
Blockchain Framework for offering National 
Blockchain 
Service 
and 
creation 
of 
a 
Blockchain Ecosystem: Blockchain, a distributed 
ledger technology, enables a layer of trust and 
eliminates the need for a third party to validate 
the transactions. Considering the requirement 
for shared Blockchain infrastructure, Ministry of 
Electronics and Information technology has initiated 
an R&D project titled “Design and Development of a 
Unified Blockchain Framework for offering National 
Blockchain Service and creation of Blockchain 
Ecosystem”. It is a consortium project with C-DAC 
centres (Hyderabad, Pune and Mumbai), NIC, 
SETS Chennai, IIT Hyderabad, IIIT Hyderabad 
and IDRBT Hyderabad as implementing agencies. 
MeitY launched NBF on 4th September 2024 
to provide Blockchain-as-a-Service (BaaS). It 
supports distributed infrastructure, smart contracts, 
security, privacy, interoperability, and permissioned 
blockchain 
application 
development. 
Various 
use cases are being developed with government 
agencies under the Unified Blockchain Framework 
(UBF). The project has resulted in 5 patents and 38 
research papers.
	
National 
Level 
Blockchain 
Portal 
(https://
blockchain.meity.gov.in/) is also developed with 
sections covering Blockchain related Articles, 
Education & Training programmes, Success 
Stories, Latest News, Startup details, and Use 
Cases

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
110
•	
Bharat DB: Databases play a vital role in enabling 
various services. However, many commercial 
databases and open-source platforms currently 
come from international vendors, creating a 
reliance on external sources. To reduce this 
dependency and leverage emerging opportunities, 
there is a need to develop a locally managed, 
secure, resilient, and reliable database platform 
that supports native Indian languages. In response 
to this need, MeitY has initiated a research 
project to develop an indigenous database 
platform, BharatDB. This is being implemented 
jointly by Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
IITM Pravartak Technology Foundation Ltd and 
CDAC, Chennai. This platform aims to foster a 
comprehensive database ecosystem with a strong 
focus on security, resilience, and reliability. It will 
empower digital transformation and drive growth 
in the digital economy across various sectors. 
The project also emphasizes the development 
of specialized skills in database engineering 
to enhance, maintain, and support BharatDB. 
Furthermore, it aims to nurture startups that will 
create niche tools, enhancements, updates, 
and patches for the core open-source platform, 
ensuring a sustainable and thriving ecosystem.
•	
Open Challenge Competition for Development 
of “Indian Web Browser with built-in CCA 
India Root Certificate: A web browser is vital for 
digital transactions, yet existing popular browsers 
do not fully address India’s unique requirements, 
particularly those related to digital signing under 
Indian laws. Additionally, these browsers lack 
support for Transport Layer Security (TLS) 
certificates issued by the Controller of Certifying 
Authorities (CCA) India. In alignment with the vision 
of Aatmanirbhar Bharat, the Indian Web Browser 
Development Challenge, launched by MeitY on 
August 9, 2023, and being implemented by C-DAC 
Bangalore, aims to create an indigenous browser 
for desktop and mobile platforms. The browser will 
adhere to W3C standards, include a Trust Store 
with CCA India’s root certificate, support Indian 
languages, and feature parental controls and web 
filters. With the productization stage complete, the 
project will deliver three browsers—one winner 
and two runner-ups—advancing India’s digital self-
reliance.
•	
HPC based Quantum Accelerators for enabling 
Quantum Computing on Supercomputers: 
The 
Quantum 
Accelerator 
project, 
initiated 
by the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (MeitY), is an effort to develop a 
quantum computing simulator platform, using high-
performance computing capabilities of existing 
PARAM supercomputers. Its primary objective is 
to expedite the execution of quantum algorithms, 
harnessing the processing power of GPU, Vector, 
and FPGA cards, with a notable demonstration 
featuring the state-of-the-art Rudra GPU board. 
The outcome of this project is establishment of a 
“Quantum Experience Centre,” which will serve as 
a national hub for quantum software development 
in a cloud-based environment. With this cutting-
edge infrastructure in place, the project aims to 
address a wide array of use cases spanning diverse 
fields, such as drug discovery, artificial intelligence, 
cryptography, agriculture, finance and more. This 
will prepare our country for the quantum revolution 
by providing the quantum ecosystem for the large 
technical workforce of the country. As India has 
already shown its potential in IT and software 
development sectors, Quantum Accelerators can 
give a platform to students, researchers, software 
developers, start-ups to innovate and implement 
their idea of Quantum Computing on Quantum 
Accelerators.
Quantum Accelerator Architecture

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
111
•	
FinTeQ-Quantum-Safe Financial Transaction 
Framework: The Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY) has initiated the 
FinTeQ project to develop a quantum-safe financial 
transaction framework. The project focuses 
on creating a secure dongle for safe access to 
web and mobile applications in B2C and C2C 
transactions, adhering to PKCS#7 and PKCS#11 
standards. For B2B transactions, it introduces 
an indigenous Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) 
solution ensuring quantum-enhanced security for 
high-value exchanges. This initiative strengthens 
the security of financial transactions with quantum 
technology, positioning the sector for future growth.
FinteQ Framework
•	
Development of Secure Post Quantum Public 
Key Infrastructure: The advent of quantum 
computers threatens the security of existing Public 
Key Infrastructure (PKI). To address this, MeitY 
has initiated a project “Development of Secure 
Post Quantum Public Key Infrastructure” which 
is proposed to enable PKI with Post Quantum 
Cryptographic Algorithms, ensuring a secure PKI 
in the quantum computing era. The project brings 
multidisciplinary expertise of prestigious institutions 
such as CDAC Bangalore, CDAC Noida, IIT Madras, 
SETS Chennai and IIITD Kurnool.   The objective 
of the project is to develop Post Quantum Crypto 
Token by implementing CRYSTALS-Dilithium 
(for Digital Signature Scheme) and CRYSTALS-
Kyber 
(for 
Key 
Encapsulation 
Mechanism) 
algorithms. These algorithms have been chosen 
by the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST) as winners in the competition 
for PQC Schemes. The project also envisages the 
development of new Post Quantum Cryptographic 
Algorithms.  These algorithms will be implemented 
on Hardware (FPGA) platforms and integrated 
with Post Quantum Crypto token. The Certificate 
Authority suite will be enabled with Post Quantum 
Crypto Token. The developed solution will enhance 
the security of the Public Key Infrastructure against 
both classical and quantum computers.
•	
Quantum Machine Learning Use Cases and 
Applications: MeitY has initiated a project 
envisioning the establishment of a robust quantum 
research and development ecosystem that drives 
long-term innovation in quantum machine learning 
(QML) and its real-world applications. The project 
is being implemented by CDAC (Hyderabad, 
Mohali, Noida, Delhi, CINE), IIT (Roorkee, Ropar, 
Gandhinagar) and IIIT Hyderabad. The project 
aims to Develop Quantum Machine Learning 
Applications which could leverage quantum 
advantage in solving complex problems in areas of 
healthcare, geology, surveillance, cyber security, 
emergency management, remote sensing and 
chemistry. Another major activity in the project 
includes Capacity building of more than 700 
manpower in the country in the areas of Quantum 
Computing and Quantum Machine Learning. By 
fostering a skilled workforce and encouraging 
collaborations with startups and industries, the 
project will drive the growth of a self-sustaining 
quantum ecosystem in India.
•	
Enabling Secure Boot in RISC-V Processors 
using Post Quantum Secure Schemes: In light 
of the advancements in quantum computing, it is 
crucial to migrate to post-quantum schemes in 
various environments, especially for applications 
like secure booting. MeitY has initiated a project 
with the objective to demonstrate the secure boot 
functionality in a RISC-V environment, using both 
classical and post-quantum secure cryptographic 
schemes, alongwith on-chip keys generation. The 
project is being implemented by SETS Chennai 
and C-DAC Thiruvananthapuram focuses on 
developing three secure boot environments specific 
to RISC-V architecture, one based on Edwards-
curve Digital Signature Algorithm (EdDSA), another 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
112
on eXtended Merkle Signature Scheme (XMSS3), 
and third using Cryptographic Suite for Algebraic 
Lattices (CRYSTALS)-DILITHIUM or MAYO.
•	
Design and Development of software system 
for detecting and flagging Deepfake Videos and 
Images: MeitY initiated a research project “Design 
and Development of Software System for Detecting 
and Flagging Deepfake Videos and Images”.  Under 
this initiative, C-DAC has developed a prototype 
software application for deepfake detection.  The 
prototype tool for deepfake detection is developed 
as a web portal and desktop application. This 
tool with limited access is hosted at https://
deepfakecheck.in and is currently in the testing 
phase. The desktop application “FakeCheck,” with 
similar features to the web portal, is developed for 
users who need deepfake detection without the 
Internet. The tool has been provided to a few law 
enforcement agencies for testing and feedback.
•	
Indigenous 
Intelligent 
and 
Scalable 
Neuromorphic Multi Chip for AI Training and 
Inference Solutions: MeitY initiated a research 
project at IIT Hyderabad, aimed to design and 
develop an indigenous neuro-morphic architecture 
for AI training and inferencing. The project 
progresses from FPGA prototyping to System on 
Chip (SOC) realization, leading to fabrication of a 
MCM (Multi-Chip Module) module which comprises 
multiple SOCs. The team has demonstrated 
various applications such as image classification, 
object detection etc on the FPGA prototype. The 
first Chip Tapeout using TSMC 65nm has been 
completed, with ongoing optimization efforts to 
enhance performance, reduce power consumption, 
minimize chip area, memory integration etc.
•	
Development of computational protocols for 
designing inhibitors using PARP-1: Breast 
cancer is the most common type of cancer among 
the Indian population, with lack of awareness and 
high cost of treatment leads to lower reporting of 
illnesses. Poly Adenosine Diphosphate Ribose 
polymerase (PARP-1) inhibitors are among a 
few handfuls of targets which play an efficient 
role in treating breast cancer. A project has been 
initiated at NIPER, Guwahati for the development 
of computational protocols for designing inhibitors 
using PARP-1 as a model and synthesis & biological 
evaluation of designed inhibitors. Machine Learning 
models for prediction of PARP-1 activity have been 
designed and deployed as a web-server-based 
GUI. The work has led to publications in high-
impact journals and development of two webtools: 
one for assessing drug synthesis routes and 
another for the prediction of PARP-1 inhibitors. The 
tool for assessing drug synthesis route greenness 
has been granted copyright, while the copyright 
for PARP-1 Inhibitors Predictor PIP1.0 has been 
applied
•	
A Brain Machine Interface enabled Assistive 
Communication System for Children with 
Special 
Needs: 
A 
Brain-Machine 
Interface 
(BMI)-enabled 
Assistive 
Communication 
System (VIVAVN) is designed for children with 
special needs. It assists them in fulfilling their 
requirements for food, posture adjustments, 
and other daily activities, and includes a basic 
alarm system for emergencies.. Brain Computer 
Interface (BCI) serves as a transformative bridge 
between individuals with special needs and the 
external world, offering assistive technology. 
People who can’t communicate verbally or through 
gestures may communicate through this system 
by interpreting their brain signals. It collects EEG 
data from a person non-invasively and analyses 
it to understand their intentions. The computer 
performs the commands as per the person’s 
requirement. 
This 
multidisciplinary 
research 
work is being conducted by C-DAC Delhi, AIIMS 
Delhi, C-DAC Thiruvananthapuram and GMC 
Thiruvananthapuram. 
P300 oddball paradigm speller developed

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
113
SSVEP based paradigm is tested 
•	
Multi-Model Neuro-Physiological Framework for 
Cognitive Behavioural Analysis: Understanding 
Human Behaviour is a very important phenomenon. 
It can be done by human cognitive analysis with the 
help of Artificial Intelligence. The project integrates 
diverse neurological and physiological signal data 
of users to understand human cognition skills like 
perception, attention, memory, reasoning, and 
problem solving. The key feature of the project is 
to apply advanced fusion algorithms on generated 
Indianized data by setting-up a multi-modal lab. 
Here, the project objectives like Lie detection and 
malicious behaviour detection may help in further 
behaviour analysis in extended domains such 
as security and forensic. It is expected that this 
comprehensive approach will enhance the ability 
to decipher complex behavioural patterns using 
multidisciplinary domain expertise like Psychology, 
Neurology, and Artificial Intelligence. 
•	
An Multi-Modal Neuro-Physiological Framework 
(Sangyan) for Behaviour Analysis (MNP) developed. 
This employs a comprehensive framework for 
insider threats detection and interrogation on 
suspects for inner cordon security purposes. The 
system utilizes advanced neuro methods of brain 
signal analysis for detecting lies, abnormalities, and 
malicious patterns, alongside multimodal fusion 
methods that incorporate six different modalities: 
EEG, ECG, EOG, GSR, eye tracking, and audio-
video. A key feature is its interactive dashboard 
for data analytics, event reporting, and monitoring 
on web platforms. A dataset platform (Data-Echo) 
also has been created using Multi-Modal Neuro-
Physiological data of EEG, EoG, ECG, GSR, Eye 
Gaze, Audio and Video data.
Multimodal Neuro-Physiological Framework
•	
Improving the effectiveness of the Gems 
and Jewelry Industry by leveraging Machine 
Learning and Data Science to improve the Hit 
Ratio and address the Casting issues: A project 
has been implemented at IIT-Bombay to develop 
and build a data platform to collect data, and design 
machine learning algorithms to aid Gems and 
Jewelry industry in reducing their manufacturing 
cost, improve their jewelry quality and increase hit-
ratio for their designs. In totality, this would help the 
sector consolidate its leadership position globally 
and make them more competitive to capture new 
emerging markets. 
	
The project is a collaborative initiative comprising of 
MeitY and GJSCI (Gem and Jewellery Skill Council 
of India). Eleven jewelry industries are working 
constantly with IIT Bombay under this project.
	
This project comprises of two verticals, namely, 
Machine learning Model for porosity in castings and 
Machine Learning Model for demand forecasting. 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
114
	
Under this project, machine learning models have 
been successfully developed to address key 
challenges in the Gems and Jewellery industry. 
A demand forecasting model has been built 
using sales and fixed shop data, enabling jewelry 
retailers to obtain weekly demand predictions 
for various product categories. Furthermore, a 
simulation-based porosity prediction model has 
been completed, along with an AI-based prediction 
model for optimizing casting parameters such as 
gating and riser design.
•	
Development of a Quantum optical sensor 
based system to identify and categorize 
Arsenic and Lead in water even with very low 
concentration: Identification of ultra fine trace 
elements in water, packaged food, etc. is a crucial 
societal need. However, existing measurement 
techniques face limitations in resolution. MeitY 
initiated a research project for the development 
of a quantum sensor-based array device for 
grading the quality of usable water, primarily for 
drinking purposes by CDAC Kolkata and Tezpur 
University, Assam. The team has synthesized 
and characterized sensing material Fe@rGO 
and Fe3O4@SiO2 for detecting arsenic (As) and 
lead (Pb) respectively. An optical fibre coupler 
with a sensing region has been fabricated. A 
GUI has been developed to allow seamless data 
retrieval from cloud for remote analysis. A three-
day workshop “Quantum Computing Explained: 
From Qubits to Algorithms (Dec 14-16 2024)” was 
organized by CDAC, Kolkata to provide hands-on 
training to undergraduate/ graduate students in 
quantum technologies. ISQCI 2024, a two days 
Symposium also organized by CDAC Kolkata, 
Patna and CINE.
International Symposium on Quantum Computing and 
Innovations (ISQCI-2024) on 17th and 18th December 2024
A free space and fiber-based hybrid Mach Zehnder 
correlated output interferometric setup for enhanced 
sensitivity.
An all-fiber Mach Zehnder correlated output IoT-enabled 
interferometric setup for enhanced sensitivity

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
115
•	
Blockchain and Machine Learning Powered 
Unified Video Know Your Customer (KYC) 
Framework: Know Your Customer (KYC) is a key 
requirement for identity verification in the financial 
sector. MeitY has initiated a research project to 
develop a Blockchain and Machine Learning-
powered Unified Video KYC Framework. The 
framework will enable multiple regulated entities 
(REs) in the financial sector to collaborate to carry 
out video-based KYC of their customers and to 
share KYC data among themselves on a need-
to-know basis. Being implemented by IDRBT, 
IIIT Hyderabad, and IIT Bhilai, the project has 
developed an end-to-end framework solution with 
various integrated components. These include 
video KYC front-end and back-end applications, 
a voice-based bot, face and document image 
quality estimators, data extraction tools, face spoof 
and deep fake detectors, face matching, and a 
blockchain platform for secure KYC processing. 
The solution is currently undergoing testing.
Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme for Electronics and IT: 
MeitY has initiated “Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme for 
Electronics and IT” with an objective to enhance the 
number of PhDs in Electronics System Design and 
Manufacturing (ESDM) and IT/IT Enabled Services (IT/
ITES) sectors in the country. The scheme has been 
implemented by Digital India Corporation.
The Phase-I of the scheme was initiated in March, 2014 
with a total budget outlay of Rs. 466 Crores for nine 
years. The major achievements of the first phase of the 
scheme includes completion of 751 Full-time and 157 
Part-time PhDs. Additionally, 62 full-time and 9 part-
time PhD candidates have submitted their theses, while 
75 full-time and 107 part-time candidates are currently 
pursuing their PhDs. Furthermore, Phase I of the scheme 
has awarded 158 Young Faculty Research Fellowships 
(YFRF). Under this phase, PhD candidates and YFRF 
awardees have published 5,750 research papers and 
applied for 85 patents.
The Phase-II of the scheme was initiated in September, 
2021 with a total budget outlay of Rs. 481.93 Crs. for a 
period of 9 years. The salient features of Phase-II of the 
scheme are:
•	
1000 Full Time PhD seats in the areas of ESDM & 
IT/ITES.
•	
225 Post-Doctoral Fellowships.
•	
One time support for 250 Candidates for 6 months 
Visit to Labs Abroad.
•	
Contingency Research Grant of Rs. 1.20 Lakh/
year to each Full Time PhD Scholars
•	
150 Part Time PhD seats & 50 “Young Faculty 
Research Fellowships”.
•	
One time award of Rs. 3.0 Lakh for Part Time PhD 
Candidates after completion of PhD. 
•	
YFRF Fellowship & Contingency Grant of Rs. 
20,000/- per month & Rs. 5 Lakh/year respectively 
upto 5 years.
Under Phase-II of the scheme three rounds of PhD seat 
allocation have been completed. A total of 600 full-time 
& 90 Part-time PhD seats have been allocated to 112 
institutions and 51 institutions respectively across the 
country. 11 Young Faculty Research Fellowship (YFRF) 
has been awarded.  
5.2	
Translation R&D
5.2.1	 Initiatives under Electronics Components and 
Material Development Programme (EMDP)
Electronics Components & Material Development 
Programme (EMDP) has been promoting research 
and development (R&D) activity since 1986 to nurture 
electronics development in the country for boosting 
local manufacturing. EMDP’s core areas of research 
are electronics materials, components and process 
technology, photonics, electronics waste recycling 
(e-waste) and additive manufacturing. EMDP supported 
National MISSION under National Policy 2012 on 
Electronics: “Promotion of a vibrant and sustainable 
ecosystem 
of 
R&D 
design, 
engineering 
and 
innovation in electronics” during 2012 to 2018. EMDP 
is currently supporting National Policy on Electronics 
2019 (NPE 2019): “Encourage industry–led R&D 
and innovation in all sub-sectors of electronics”. 
The strategy under this objective is to adopt top-
down approach or market pull R&D to cater for local 
manufacturing needs in the electronics sector. Under this 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
116
objective EMDP’s core areas of research are Electronics 
Materials & Components, Photonics (Photonic Integrated 
Circuits etc), Circular Economy & E-waste, IoT Sensors 
and Additive Manufacturing & 3D Printing. To cater to the 
objective, EMDP has focused on establishment of self-
sustaining R&D centres with industrial partnership where 
industry is playing key roles in technology road-mapping, 
administration, funding and self-sustenance of the R&D 
platform. Govt. is extending funding, knowhow, scientific 
manpower, laboratory access, and IPR (existing) for 
development of industry demanded product prototype, 
indigenous technology solutions and IPR generation 
with specific target plans for commercialization through 
ToT to industry & start- ups and create atmosphere for 
absorption of the technologies in Indian market. 
EMDP program has 112 filed patents (figure above) in 
last 10 years and has initiated 16 R&D centres till date. 
Details of these centers have been included in Centres 
of Excellence sections of this chapter. The other ongoing 
technology developments under EMDP are provided 
below:
• 
Project Review & Information Management 
Electronics (PRIME) System for MeitY: 
 
 
To promote transparency, efficiency, col-
laboration and data-based decision making 
an online portal “Project Review and Infor-
mation Management Electronics System” or 
PRIME System has been launched by Min-
istry of Electronics and Information Technol-
ogy (MeitY). 
 
 
With PRIME, MeitY’s vision is to ease the 
information sharing, strengthening of the 
research eco- system, developing a one-go 
dashboard for all, to enable sustained devel-
opment and ease of doing business. 
 
 
At its core, PRIME is an end-to-end life cy-
cle management system that streamlines 
the entire process of proposal submission 
and project management. It is a comprehen-
sive system that strengthens Meity’s project 
management workflow by offering a range 
of powerful components. The portal is de-
signed and maintained by Centre for Devel-
opment of Advanced Computing (C-DAC), 
Noida. 
	
The portal can be accessed at https://www.
meityprime.in/ 
• 
CW/Modulated Thulium Fiber Laser (TFL) 
System for Soft Tissue Vaporization/Ablation: 
 
 
Vaporization is a promising technique for 
faster treatments of benign prostate hyper-
plasia (BPH), eliminating the use of addition-
al step for morcellation phase. Pulsed Hol-
mium: Yttrium--aluminum-garnet (Ho:YAG; 
l=2.12 µm) laser is a ‘gold standard’ clinical 
tool in urology. However, the limited pulsed 
operation of Ho:YAG laser is not very much 
applicable for the process of cutting or co-
agulation. 
 
 
In this respect, continuous wave (CW) op-
eration of Thulium:Yttrium-aluminum-garnet 
(Tm:YAG; l=2.013 µm) laser is an promis-
ing alternative laser for the surgical man-
agement of BPH. Over the bulk YAG based 
lasers, the recent technological advance-
ment in fiber laser provides extremely high 
beam quality, high wall plug efficiency, and 

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
117
maintenance-free operation to integrate with 
a compact system for surgical applications. 
TFLs at 1.94 μm are becoming a promising 
energy source for high end surgery as the 
operating wavelength is more closely match-
ing the water absorption peak, resulting in 
a lower ablation threshold and higher abla-
tion rate over the Ho:YAG or Tm:YAG laser. 
A single mode beam of TFL allows a high-
power delivery through a small-core fiber. 
 
 
Additionally, TFL can operate for a wide 
range of pulse properties and CW power 
levels, allowing use of a single system in 
different mode of treatment. MeitY through 
CGCRI in collaboration with M/s BioradMe-
disys Pvt. Ltd, Pune has now been able to 
design and develop CW/Modulated Thulium 
fiber laser (TFL) for pre-clinical validation in 
soft issue Vaporization/Ablation. The system 
is ready for its lunching in January 2024. 
The project has been completed with ONE 
ToT, ONE Patent, FOUR research students 
training. The developed surgical system is 
unique not only as import substitution but 
for i) operating wavelength closely matches 
with cellular water absorption ii) minimally in-
vasive surgery iii) wide range of TFL settings 
- use of same instrument to different mode of 
treatment, hence cost effective iv) minimum 
optical component architecture v) compact 
system with safety features and less main-
tenance. 
 
 
The development is jointly with industry 
hence all the protocols are maintained as 
per medical instrument certification require-
ment. The table top research on optimization 
of thulium fiber laser cavity such as efficiency, 
laser spectrum and Quasi-CW pulse tem-
poral characteristic has been translated to 
a stable prototype which is under reliability 
testing as shown below.
• 
Metamaterials based Compact Broadband 
Tunable Modulator for Terahertz Photonics: 
 
 
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, in 
collaboration with Mahindra University, Hy-
derabad, has been working on developing 
a compact prototype device for broadband 
terahertz frequency modulation. The device 
will be capable of modulating and transmit-
ting information at hundreds of gigabits per 
second (Gbps). 
 
 
To achieve this, a new class of electromag-
netic metamaterial structures has been in-
vestigated. Currently, work is going on a 
multi-stacked metamaterial configuration for 
broadband tunable terahertz transmission. 
 
 
Through numerical simulations, bandwidth 
of 0.7 THz has been achieved in the design. 
Efforts are being made to further fine-tune 
the broadband transmission, and the initial 
fabrication and characterization of the device 
have been completed. 
 
 
A state-of-the-art experimental facility is be-
ing developed for characterizing devices at 
terahertz frequencies in transmission, reflec-
tion, and absorption modes at IIT Guwahati. 
 
 
To gain a better understanding of the work-
ing principles of the multistacked metamate-
rial (MM), the circuit theory has been devel-
oped, which is useful for further optimizing 
the MM. Further exploration is going on for 
the active tenability of the device.
• 
Hybrid battery power module with indigenously 
developed super-capacitor and Li-ion cell:
 
 
MeitY initiated a development work for hybrid 
battery module for utilization of abundant 
North Eastern coal feed stock and provide 
a solution for the demand of large-scale gra-
phene materials in power sector. The project 
was executed by CSIR-NEIST, Jorhat. 
 
 
The graphene optimized synthetic process 
consists of a simple chemical approach 
combined with the ultracentrifugation/ultra-
filtration techniques. This work also demon-
strated that the low- grade and pollutive coal 
feedstock can have environmentally green 
and sustainable utilization as a suitable pre-
cursor for indigenous graphene derivatives 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
118
in our country with excellent potential in 
power applications. 
 
 
The project demonstrated supercapacitor-
battery hybrid module for e-rickshaw appli-
cation. The application product technology 
has been transferred to M/s Anvaya Innova-
tions, Jorhat, Assam.
• 
Feasibility study for development of process 
technology to recover valuable materials from 
end-of life silicon solar modules: 
 
 
The R&D project has been initiated at C-
MET Hyderabad with an objective to develop 
an environmentally benign technology for re-
cycling of end-of-life (EoL) silicon solar mod-
ules. 
 
 
Accordingly, a process technology has been 
developed to recover valuable materials 
from the waste crystalline silicon solar pan-
els, which are currently dominant with ~95% 
abundancy in the market. 
 
 
The R&D has reached a technology readi-
ness level of 4 with 10 kg input per batch 
processing to final recovery of products. Sili-
con has been recovered as one of the major 
products with 99.999% (5N) purity. 
 
 
The developed technology has also been 
transferred to M/s Greenko, a world-re-
nowned industry in the renewable energy 
sector. Further up-scaling of process is in 
progress.
• 
Development 
of 
digital 
networking 
for 
preventive 
and 
predictive 
environmental 
and climatic warning solutions - Building an 
Entrepreneurial ecosystem for addressing 
Environmental Issues: 
 
 
The primary focus of this project is to ad-
vance digital networking for proactive and 
predictive environmental and climatic warn-
ing systems. This  project comprises two key 
components: the development of an intelli-
gent sensor module to monitor and control 
environmental pollution and a smart water 
level monitoring system that includes flood 
alert capabilities. 
 
 
In addition, we are establishing a digital in-
frastructure for efficient local water level 
monitoring and management. Furthermore, 
the project aims to foster a startup ecosys-
tem and promote skill development in the 
context of IoT solutions.
• 
Early detection of pest on Tea plantation 
through Multispectral imaging from Unmanned 
Aerial Vehicle:
 
 
MeitY through Tezpur University, Assam is 
developing low- cost, rapid and early detec-
tion system based on arrays of multispectral 
and thermal imaging sensors on (unmanned 
aerial vehicles UAV) for pest infestation in 
tea crops to help the farmers to plan pest 
control strategies. 
 
 
Under the program development of thermal 
imaging system, hyperspectral imaging sen-
sor on Unmanned Aerial Vehicle and post 
processing deep learning algorithm has 
been completed and initial field testing has 
been completed. The system has now suc-
cessfully demonstrated Red Spider Mite, 
Tea Mosquito Bug infestation on tea leaves. 
The project has now successfully devel-
oped multispectral imaging system to detect 
Looper caterpillar, Red spider moth and Tea 
mosquito Bug. 
 
 
Creation of deep learning algorithm and pest 
infestation data base is near completed. 
Various multirotor drone designs and mul-
tiple materials have been tested. A highly 
customized ultra-high frequency telemetry 
trans – receiving modules are designed. 
Autonomous drone deployment mechanism 
is developed and tested. GPS based aerial 
mapping tool is developed and being tested. 
 
 
Obstacle detection mechanism has also 
been developed and is currently being test-
ed. A real time data link system between 
drone and ground station has been con-

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
119
structed and development of Flight Control 
Software and field module is completed. The 
productization efforts with a smaller form 
factor drone and enhancement of accuracy 
of GPS location is underway. Field testing of 
developed system is also on-going. 
• 
Entrepreneurial 
Training 
Programme 
for 
Scheduled Tribe Community of Union Territory 
of Ladakh to Produce Solar Lanterns for 
Lighting Applications
 
 
The project “Entrepreneurial Training Pro-
gramme for Scheduled Tribe Community of 
Union Territory of Ladakh to Produce Solar 
Lanterns for Lighting Applications” is to bring 
up the under privileged communities in vari-
ous areas of technology and for creating an 
indigenous local supply chain. C-MET in as-
sociation with University of Ladakh is imple-
menting this project to foster entrepreneur-
ship and create livelihood among the ST 
communities in the UT of Ladakh.  
 
 
Most of the tribal areas are isolated and lo-
cated in remote places deep into the Hima-
layas and borders and hence electrification 
is not an easy task. Due to lack of electricity 
and lighting facilities, the tribal communities 
suffer a lot of difficulties including attacks 
from wild animals in the night. Moreover, the 
lack of proper lighting facilities affects the 
education of tribal children which in turn has 
direct impact on the social upliftment of the 
tribal community. 
 
 
The quality of life can be improved very 
much if they can have a lighting system for 
their bare minimum requirements which can 
be charged directly from solar power. In ad-
dition to that, if they can produce it them-
selves and market it, they can also find out 
a steady income for their livelihood. C-MET 
has developed technologies for various 
types of solar lanterns such as Solar lantern 
with Li-ion battery, Solar lantern with super 
capacitor and Hybrid solar lantern with super 
capacitor and Li-ion battery. 
 
 
In a similar programme, C-MET has imparted 
training on production of solar lanterns and 
LED bulbs to more than 300 youths in ST 
community in Kerala. Through this project, 
now the entrepreneurial training is extended 
to the Schedule Tribe communities of  UT 
of Ladakh in association with University of 
Ladakh.
• 
Development 
of 
Electrically 
Conductive 
Adhesives for the Microelectronic Packaging 
and Flexible Film Circuits
 
 
The project “Development of Electrically 
Conductive Adhesives for the Microelec-
tronic Packaging and Flexible Film Circuits” 
is an initiative of Government of India to in-
digenize conductive adhesives used in flex-
ible electronics and its components such 
as nano-silver. The project is being imple-
mented by IIT Ropar and NIT Warangal in 
association with an industry partner & finan-
cially sponsored by Ministry of Electronics & 
Information Technology, Govt. of India and 
an industry partner. 
 
 
The project aims to generate know-how of 
making conductive adhesive formulation, 
using it in flexible electronics, and demon-
stration of a few devices. Specifically, the 
products envisaged for development under 
the project are conductive adhesive, heavy 
metal detection device, and gas sensing 
device. Besides this, the project will gener-
ate trained manpower including PhD hold-

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
120
ers and Research Associates. This will help 
bridge the gap of skilled manpower require-
ment of the industry. 
 
 
The developed technology has been trans-
fered to startups incubated at N&T warangal 
and IIT Ropar.
5.2.2	 Technology Development & Demonstration for 
Indian Industries
5.2.2.1 
Collaborative 
Intelligent 
Transportation 
Systems Endeavour for Indian Cities – InTranSE 
Phase II.
Through 
InTranSE 
Program 
technologies/product 
developed which may provide ease of driving, safety, 
energy savings, reduce carbon footprint etc has been 
developed. These solutions have been designed and 
developed keeping in view the India specific scenarios 
like right hand driving, heterogeneous traffic, non-lane 
based driving, vehicles from wrong side etc.  Many of 
these have been commercialized and being used in 
different cities in the country not only for traffic control 
but also as an important component of Smart Cities.
Under this Program 74 Manpower has been trained. 22 
technologies/systems have been developed and some of 
them are industrial grade.
Under the second Phase of ITS, wherein we have 
developed technology for Traffic Simulators, Driving 
Simulators, Surveillance camera for traffic control, Driving 
assistance technology, universal interfacing of devices 
using one M2M standards, Bus priority system, Data 
driven decision making systems, Fleet Management etc. 
5.2.2.2 Development of Electronics & IT based 
Control & Automation solutions for consumer (Toy 
industries) electronic goods.
This is a project for creation of research and development 
capabilities among the candidates from SC/ ST and NE 
region. The young engineering graduates will be taken 
and after capacity building, they will be involved in design 
and development of electronics based toys as per the 
requirement of toy industry which has already been tied 
up. The candidates from these three categories will do 
the R&D activities in a small group of two and will also 
get toy industry exposure by visiting them/ working there 
as interns for a short duration. Their activities will be 
monitored and guided by senior scientists of CDAC Noida 
on one/two groups per scientist basis. Since these SC/
ST/NER candidates will be engineering graduates, they 
will be given a suitable stipend for the project duration. 
Under the special budget provision for SC/ST/NER 
communities, 60 fresh engineering graduates will be 
provided with necessary capacity to do research & 
development in high tech electronics with an application 
to toy industry. About 25-30 prototypes of electronic toys 
are expected in this project. 
Toys Convocation Ceremony of First Batch                                

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
121
5.2.2.3	 Design and development of indigenous, cost-
effective Autonomous Tractor, for Indian Farming 
Conditions and Applications (A-TRACT).
The project envisages the design and development of 
technologies and system components for an indigenous 
and cost-effective Autonomous Tractor, specifically for 
Indian farming conditions. In this project the aim is to 
undertake the indigenous development of the system 
components that are required for autonomous navigation. 
These components are currently sourced from external 
vendors and integrated into the system architecture, 
thereby increasing costs. The project is progressing.
5.2.2.4 Autonomous Bathymetric Survey Vessel 
(ABSV) for Advanced Glacier Lake Profiling
A project on Design and Development of an 
Autonomous bathymetric survey vessel for reservoir 
and glacier lake profiling has been awarded to  CDAC 
-Thiruvananthapuram. The system is the first of its kind 
in the country and will be a great boon to the Nation in 
the area of disaster forecast and management. Although 
glacier outburst flood happened in many parts of the 
world, a scientific repository for analysis of the frequency 
of events, actual impact of the GLOF to the environment 
and to human settlements are not documented properly. 
By profiling the glacier lake on a regular basis may 
mitigate the hazard and make aware the people to be 
prepared to handle such situations. Also depending 
on the characteristics of the lake we could rank the 
glaciers based on the chance of occurrence of GLOF.
Prototype of the system has been completed and testing 
is in progress. For Development of innovative and 
sustainable indigenous solutions for GLOF mitigation 
Grand Challenge on HIMASHIELD was announced.
5.2.2.5 The project on “TULIP: TEA HARVESTING 
UNMANNED ROBOTIC PLATFORM FOR NORTHEAST 
INDIAN TEA PLANTATION”
The project is being implemented in a collaborative 
manner with CDAC-Kolkata as nodal agency and 
TTRA-Jorhat, Jadavpur University and CIAE-Bhopal as 
participating agencies. The prime focus of the project 
is development of low cost Robotic harvester for small 
and medium scale Tea gardens with the features like 
selective plucking etc
The developed Selective Tea Plucker (STP) has been 
developed and fine tuning is in progress to make it ready 
as field deployable and industry grade. 
Joint Call for Proposal under MeitY- NSF (USA) 
Research Collaboration.
The U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) and the 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY) of the Government of India have signed an 
Implementation Arrangement on research cooperation. 
The Implementation Arrangement provides a framework 
to encourage collaborations between U.S. and Indian 
research communities  and sets out the principles by 
which joint activities might be supported. This  NSF-
MeitY collaborative opportunity focuses on research and 
technological development  in areas of mutual interest 
listed through the participating NSF programs that 
develop new knowledge in all aspects of semiconductor 
research, next-generation communication systems, 
cyber-security, sustainability and green technologies, 
and intelligent transportation systems. 
The Leaders announced the award of 12 funding awards 
under the National Science Foundation and Ministry 
of Electronics and Information Technology, research 
collaboration with a combined outlay of nearly $10 million 
to enable joint U.S.-India. 
5.2.2.6 National Mission on Power Electronics 
Technology (Phase-III)
The National Mission on Power Electronics Technology 
Phase-III (NaMPET-III) program is ongoing with an 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
122
objective to strengthen the power electronics technology 
base in the country by carrying out a multitude of 
activities like Technology development, deployment, 
technology transfer, awareness creation & manpower 
development and strengthening the industry interactions 
with R&D and academic institutes through collaborative 
research projects. So far, 39 sub-projects in the areas of 
Power Electronics and its applications in different sectors 
like Wide Band Gap (WBG), semiconductor-based PE 
systems, Power, e-Mobility, Food processing, Agriculture, 
Industry and Health, Grid, Renewable Energy etc., have 
been taken up and progressing.
Under the programme more than 20 academic 
institutions and industries are participating in the 
technology development and commercialization through 
Transfer of Technologies (ToT). So far 1.5kW wireless 
charger, WBG material-based Magnetometer, MEMS 
sensors for torque/ vibration, Planar Magnetics, (50Hz) 
Transformer-less Dual mode Power Conditioner for 
Microgrid, AC & DC fast Charger for EV, LVDC power 
distribution in houseboat, Integrated drive for BLDC, 
Model EV charging station, AMI Pilot deployment, etc 
has been completed. Out of these technologies, 03 new 
technologies, the High voltage high-frequency Planar 
magnetics technology, Smart Energy Meter technologies, 
and Hybrid Power Conditioning Systems for Microgrids 
technologies have been transferred to the industries for 
further commercialization. 
Transfer of High voltage high-frequency Planar magnetics 
technology to M/s Reliamotive Labs, Bangalore
Transfer of Smart Energy Meter technologies to  
M/s JMV LPS, Noida
Product Launch of Power Conditioning Systems for 
Microgrids technologies with M/s Hykon India Ltd. Kochi
5.2.2.6.1 Inauguration of Model EV Charging Station
Inauguration of Model EV Charging Station by Secretary, 
MeitY on 24.08.2024 at C-DAC, Technopark Campus
The Secretary, Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (MeitY), has inaugurated the Model Electric 
Vehicle Charging Station at C-DAC Thiruvananthapuram, 

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
123
Technopark Campus on 24.08.2024. This centre has 
developed a range of indigenous AC and DC EV 
chargers under NaMPET program, from 3.3kW to 50kW. 
This center will have various AC and DC fast chargers 
for vehicles ranging from 2W to Heavy vehicles and 
play a crucial role in catalyzing an ecosystem for the 
promotion of the charging infrastructure with indigenous 
EV chargers research, development, commercialization 
and manufacturing through industries.
Charging bays in MCS with DC and AC Chargers
5.2.2.6.2 NaMPET Outreach and Collaborations
The Ministry of Electronics and IT has initiated the 
National Mission on Power Electronics Technology 
Phase-III (NaMPET-III) program to strengthen the 
power electronics technology base in the country with 
awareness creation and R&D interactions with academic 
institutes through collaborative research projects also. 
Under this activity, various Memorandum of Agreement/
Understanding 
(MoA/MoU) 
and 
Non-Disclosure 
Agreement (NDA) has been signed such as MoA signed 
between C-DAC (T) and M/s Hykon India Ltd. Kochi in 
Vehicle to Grid (V2G, V2H & V2B) technologies, MoU 
signed with M/s Tata Power Renewable Microgrid Ltd. 
for technical collaboration in Microgrid technology and 
NDA signed with Tata Power Company Limited and Tata 
Power Autocomp System Ltd. for technical cooperation 
and product realization in the area of Solar inverters- 
Central Inverter and Remote monitoring. Apart from this 
a high reliable and compact (5cmx5cmx2.5cm) state-
of-the-art GaN Power Conditioner of 3kW for integrated 
BLDC control has been developed and demonstrated in 
Wide Band Gap devices. The Smart Energy Meter (SEM) 
technology and AMI system has been CERTIN certified, 
which will enable its application in secured environments 
like Military camps.
MoU-M/s Tata Power Renewable Microgrid Ltd
 
High quality technical papers and products 
developed under  NaMPET have been showcased 
at different Power Electronics International Forum 
like Energy Conversion Congress (ECCE), US 
Department of Commerce (USDOC) Renewable 
Energy 
(RE+) 
conference, 
IEEE 
Industrial 
Electronics Society (IECON) etc.  The state-of-
the-art technologies have been recognized  and 
appreciated at international forums. 
5.2.2.7 AgriEnIcs: National Programme on Electronics 
and ICT Applications in Agriculture and Environment
The Ministry of Electronics and IT has initiated a 
national-level programme to reform the agriculture and 
environment sectors with the interventions of IoT, ICT, 
machine learning and robotics technology. The objective 
of this umbrella programme is to encompass the industry, 
users, academia, R&D institutes working in the allied 
domains of the thematic areas to develop user friendly 
and market viable technology. The AgriEnIcs programme 
is on the verge of a successful completion leading to the 
development of products and technologies, which are 
ready for commercialization. C-DAC Kolkata is executing 
this program in collaboration with multiple collaborators 
and Industry/start-ups. Research and development 
in the domains of agriculture, livestock management, 
and environment were focused, and different product 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
124
prototypes were developed. Technology transfer of the 
Air Quality Monitoring Device (AI-AQMS) has been done 
and the ToT partner has already started marketing and 
selling the products. Technologies like Cattle health 
monitoring device (GoP), Mastitis disease detector in milk 
(MAST D), Multi-grain quality analyzer (GrainEX), Chilly 
quality analyzer (CT VIEU), Smart poultry management 
and Chick gender identifier (GEMS) and Robotic apple 
harvester device are already ready for commercialization. 
	
	
	
AI-AQMS	
Go-P
Robotic Apple Harvester
5.2.2.7.1 ‘AquaSuraksha’ as ‘ACLIVIA; a biosensing-
based system as a compact testing tool for water 
analysis.
The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
under the AgriEnIcs programme has also supported the 
further commercial development of the earlier developed 
‘AquaSuraksha’ system for pesticide residue detection 
in food and water with industry partner formalized and 
selected through the expression of interest process. 
The technology partner Arogyam Medisoft Private 
Limited with C-DAC, Kolkata has further developed 
the commercially sellable device for the market as an 
offshoot of the programme with addition of more industry-
standard features.
Brochure of the ACLIVIA product being sold in the market 
developed under the AgriEnIcs programme
5.2.2.8 e-GUNA: Sensory assessment for quality of 
fermented foods from North-Eastern 
The Ministry of Electronics and IT has supported 
the project which is being implemented by Centre 
for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC), 
Kolkata, the Institute of Bioresources and Sustainable 
Development (IBSD), Imphal, the National Institute of 
Technology (NIT), Nagaland, and the Indian Institute 
of Technology (IIT), Hyderabad. This initiative aims 
to develop and deploy a point-of-analysis device for 
the detection of bacterial pathogens and toxins in 
fermented food products. Currently, the project has 

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
125
generated 03 technologies such as CG-STAT system, 
an electrochemical sensing platform for the detection 
of cyanogenic glycosides in fermented foods which has 
been developed, field trialed, deployed, and IP protected 
through an Indian patent application and copyright. IIT 
Hyderabad has pioneered the development of FP-SENS, 
a food pathogen sensor that can simultaneously detect a 
range of bacterial pathogens including Staphylococcus 
aureus, Bacillus cereus, Escherichia coli, Listeria 
monocytogenes, Clostridium botulinum, and Proteus 
mirabilis that integrates seamlessly with mobile phones. 
IBSD Imphal and NIT Nagaland have collaboratively 
worked on developing a software platform for the analysis 
of Foodpatho chips. The technologies are now ready and 
underway commercialization.
CG-STAT system
5.2.2.9 Development of Electric Vehicles (EVs) Sub 
System (EVSS)
The Ministry of Electronics & IT (MeitY) has initiated a 
program on “Development of Electric Vehicles (EVs) Sub 
System (EVSS-I) with broad objective to indigenously 
develop the Electric Vehicle sub- systems in the areas 
of Electric motor, controller, converters Chargers, BMS, 
etc., for 2-Wheeler, 3-Wheeler/e-rickshaw, and economy 
4-Wheeler. The EV sub-systems development is being 
taken up in consortium mode consisting of academic 
institutes/ R&D organization for design and development, 
industry to commercialize it and vehicle manufacturers 
to use the developed product in the manufacturing. 
Technology of 1.2 KW Motor/controller for e rickshaw, 
5KW Motor/controller for e Auto and 1KW BLDC motor/
controller for e-rickshaw has been developed, tested 
and transferred the technology to M/s Alphasine, M/s 
Amber Group, M/s Brushless Motor and M/s Lithion 
Power for production /commercialization. Currently 14 
technology development activities are progressing under 
the programme. 
Launch of Two Products developed under EVSS-
01 programme on 12 March,2024 at CDAC-
Thiruvananthapuram by Hon’ble MoS MeitY, Shri Rajeev 
Chandrasekhar
5.2.2.9.1 Announcement of MeitY-MHI Joint Call for 
Proposals
The Ministry of Electronics and IT in collaboration with 
Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI) has announced MeitY-
MHI Joint Call For Proposal for “Development of Electric 
Vehicle Sub-System ” on 21.10.2024 in the presence 
of Secretary, MeitY. Now to enhance the chances of 
commercialization, a unique model has been introduced, 
involving Product Development Agencies (PDAs) like 
T-Works, iCreate, MOTION, NATRAX, and GARC. 
These agencies will support academic institutions in 
technology development by offering their expertise and 
state-of-the-art infrastructure. The expected outcome of 
the technology/product has to be cost-effective, quality 
competitive and ready for commercialization.
Announcement of MeitY-MHI Joint Call for Proposals for 
EVSS on 21.10.2024 in the presence of Shri S. Krishnan, 
Secretary, MeitY, and Dr. Hanif Qureshi, Additional 
Secretary, MHI

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
126
5.2.2.10 Development of DLMS/ COSEM (Device 
Language 
Message 
Specification/ 
Companion 
Specification for Energy Metering) testing tool for 
Smart Energy Meter)
The project is being implemented by CPRI, Bangalore in 
association with CDAC Thiruvananthapuram. The project 
aims at the “Development of an automatic test tool of 
DLMS/COSEM for Smart Energy Meters of different 
variants like NAN & WAN communication modules 
as per standard (IS 15959 series) requirements”. The 
said software tool is named Smart Meter Integrated 
Testing and Higher Analysis (SMITHA). It is first-of-
its-kind Indigenous testing tool for conformance and 
parameter verification of smart energy meter. The beta 
version of the testing tool SMITHA V1.0 was released on 
17.05.2023 for limited users for feedback and the security 
tests conducted. The technology is currently underway in 
commercialization.
Beta version of the testing tool SMITHA V1.0
5.2.2.11 Development of IoT and Drone based 
Agricultural Monitoring System with Objective of 
Skill Development of Deprived Community
The project has been initiated under a special 
budget provision made for the SC community for the 
development and deployment of IoT and drone-based 
agriculture with Madan Mohan Malviya University of 
Technology (MMMUT) in the area of IoT and Drone. 
Training has been imparted to a total of 400 students 
in deprived communities. Two start-ups of deprived 
community students have emerged from this project. 
A total of 10 drones including 02 Agricultural Spraying 
drones of 10 Litre, 01 agricultural drones of 05 Litre, and 
other surveillance drones and data collection drones 
have been deployed. The drones have been designed 
with structural analysis for strength for tomato disease 
detection, crop prediction system based on machine 
learning, and weed identification system, therefore, 
reducing the cost of labor charge and increasing the 
quality of soil. Consecutively, 6-week summer training 
focused on this project has been provided to students 
about drone design, Internet of Things on Drones, 
Artificial Intelligence and Machine learning.
Agricultural Spraying drone, surveillance  
drone and Agro sensing display and unit
5.2.2.12 Development and deployment of Knowledge 
based Integrated Sustainable Agriculture Food 
Network (KISAN) cloud using Electronic Soil 
Nutrients Analyzer (ESNA)
This project has been initiated under special budget 
provision made for ST community for development 
and deployment of soil tester, skill development and 
entrepreneurship creation. So far, the development 
of ESNA device and its integration with KISAN cloud 
has been completed. The developed system has user-
friendly Human Machine Interface.  25 types of tablets 
in dehydrated from were also developed for use of soil 
testing. So far more than 1000 tribal youths have been 
trained and around 450 skilled entrepreneurs have 
been established through the different course modules. 
Transfer of Technology (ToT) is underway.

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
127
Electronic Soil Nutrients Analyzer (ESNA)
5.2.3 
Initiatives 
under 
Microelectronics 
and 
Nanotechnology areas
5.2.3.1 Some of the technologies developed/ are being 
developed indigenously under the R&D projects initiated 
in Microelectronics area are:
(i)	
Chips to Start-up (C2S) Programme: has been 
initiated by MeitY as capacity building programme 
at 113 organizations (including 100 academia/ 
R&D originations and 13 Start-ups/ MSMEs) with 
an outlay of Rs. 250 Crore for duration of 5 years in 
the year 2022. C2S Programme aims to generate 
industry-ready 85,000 number of manpower at 
113 organizations (including academic institutions, 
R&D organizations, start-ups, MSMEs) at B.Tech, 
M.Tech and PhD levels specialized in the area of 
VLSI and Embedded System Design and leapfrog 
in ESDM space by way of inculcating the culture of 
Chip/ System-on-Chip (SoC)/ System Level Design 
at Bachelors, Masters and Research level and act 
as a catalyst for growth of Start-ups involved in 
semiconductor design in the country. 
	
The 
Programme 
takes 
a 
comprehensive 
approach by offering students complete hands-on 
experience in chip design, fabrication, and testing. 
This is achieved through regular training sessions, 
conducted in collaboration with industry partners, 
and by providing mentorship and access to chip 
design, fabrication & testing resources to students, 
including state-of-the-art EDA (Electronic Design 
Automation) tools, access to semiconductor 
foundries for fabricating their chips etc. These 
opportunities include implementing the R&D 
(Research & Development) projects under C2S 
Programme for development of working prototypes 
of ASICs (Application-Specific Integrated Circuits), 
Systems/ 
SoCs 
(System-on-Chips), 
and 
IP 
(Intellectual Property) Core designs. Total 25,000+ 
number of engineering students have been trained 
at 113 organizations under C2S Programme till 
date
(ii)	
Design 
Linked 
Incentive 
(DLI) 
Scheme: 
Government of India has approved the ‘Modified 
Programme for Semiconductors and Display Fab 
Ecosystem’ with an outlay of ₹76,000 crore in order 
to catalyse the semiconductor & display ecosystem 
in the country. The Design Linked Incentive (DLI) 
Scheme has been approved as part of it with an 
outlay of Rs. 1000 Crore to offset the disabilities in 
the domestic semiconductor chip design industry 
as well as move up in value-chain and strengthen 
the semiconductor chip design ecosystem in 
the country. The DLI Scheme offers financial 
incentives & design infrastructure support to 
domestic companies, start-ups and MSMEs across 
various stages of development & deployment of 
semiconductor chips.
	
52 
design 
companies 
(including 
start-ups 
and MSMEs) have been approved for design 
infrastructure support under the DLI Scheme. Out 
of these, 15 companies have also been approved 
for financial support for developing semiconductor 
chip/ SoCs for applications in sectors such as 
automotive, mobility, computing, communications 
etc.
(iii)	
Microprocessor 
Development 
Programme: 
Family of 32-bit/ 64-bit Microprocessor has been 
indigenously designed using Open-Source ISA 
(Instruction Set Architecture) along with reusable 
IP Cores by C-DAC, IIT Madras & IIT Bombay. 
	
Following successful tapeouts were earlier carried 
out of – (a) 32-bit/ 64-bit SHAKTI Processors at 
180nm, SCL foundry & 22nm, Intel foundry by IIT 
Madras, (b) 32-bit AJIT Processor at 180nm, SCL 
foundry by IIT Bombay (c) 32-bit VEGA Processor 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
128
at 130nm, Silterra foundry by C-DAC and 64-
bit Dual-core VEGA processor at 28nm, TSMC. 
Following ARIES Development baords developed 
and 
commercialized 
using 
130nm 
VEGA 
Processors (details at https://vegaprocessors.in/
devboards/):
(iv)	
Design & development of NavIC Receiver: For 
effective use of Navigational services based on 
Indian Constellation of Satellites, named NavIC 
(Navigation with Indian Constellation), M/s Accord 
Software and Systems developed integrated NavIC 
and GPS Chipsets; which has been qualified by 
ISRO for deployment. About 4.5 Lakh Baseband 
Chipsets and 10 Lakh RF Chipset fabricated for 
deployment in civilian applications. 
5.2.3.2 Some of the technologies developed/ are being 
developed indigenously under the R&D projects initiated 
in Nanotechnology area are:
A.	
Products/prototypes/technologies 
developed 
and MoU signed/collaboration under the 
Nanotechnology Area:
	
1.	
A point of care device namely “Mobilab” has 
been developed by a Start-up incubated un-
der SWASTHA project at IITG for the detec-
tion of amylase, lipase, ALP, ALT, and AST. 
Ethical Clearances, ISO 13485 certification, 
ISO 9001, IEC, EMI, EMC and CDSCO 
Certification has been obtained and a plant 
has also been setup at Geater Noida for 
the product development activities. Around 
1000 patient samples have been tested with 
Mobilab in AIIMS New Delhi, GNRC Guwa-
hati, GMCH Guwahati, IIT Guwahati Hos-
pital, and Government Hospital Kanpur for 
amylase, lipase, ALP, ALT, AST and results 
are found to be more than 90% accurate. 
MOBILAB is already available on the GeM 
portal and many units have been sold so far. 
It has received a funding of Rs. 4.5 Cr from 
Angel investor.
Point of care device namely MOBILAB
	
2.	
A portable SQUID magnetometer has been 
developed with sensitivity of 5x10-10 T. The 
capability of the device for sensing the rock 
samples obtained from the Indian Institute of 
Geomagnetism has been demonstrated.
	
3.	
Prototypes of a large area solid state lighting 
panels have been developed for green light 
source with luminosity 7000 Candela/m2 and 
blue light source with luminosity 3000 Can-
dela/m2.
 
4. 
Microfluidic fuel cell for hydrogen generation 
using H2/O2 from PEC has been developed.
	
5.	
SERS chips for detection of Hemozoin 
(Marker for Malaria) have been developed 
and demonstrated for separation of Hemo-
zoin and Bacteria. 
	
6.	
A prototype device has been made for the 
detection of pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
129
	
7.	
Prototype chips have been developed for 
the detection of lead, chromium, nickel and 
zinc in water in the detection limit of 1-100 
ppm and for the detection of urea and pes-
ticide/ herbicide/ insecticide in soil with LOD 
of 30 ppm.
	
8.	
Portable Conjugated Polymer based sen-
sor has been developed for the detection of 
Monoamine Neurotransmitter and integrated 
with smartphone to perform onsite detection 
in real samples.
	
9.	
Affordable Wearable Anti-Microbial Elec-
tro-Stimulation Bandage for Treatment of 
Chronic Wounds have been developed.
	
10.	
An ultra-low-cost blood hemoglobin estima-
tion device has been developed using a pa-
per strip, offering results comparable to lab 
tests without the need for trained personnel.
On-chip detection of haemoglobin
	
11.	
A skin-dissolving microneedle array patch 
made of curcumin-bioglass composite has 
been developed for painless drug delivery, 
promoting faster healing of deep wounds 
and diabetic ulcers at risk of biofilm forma-
tion.
Microneedle array patch
	
12.	
CMOS chips for neuromorphic computing 
are being developed at CeNSE, IISc Ban-
galore. A brain-inspired computing platform 
has been developed to store and process 
data in 16,500 conductance states within a 
molecular film. Reputed international jour-
nal ‘Nature’ has published the outcomes of 
the innovation. This innovation achieved an 
energy efficiency of 4.1 tera operations per 
second per watt (TOPS/W), making it 460 
times more efficient than an 18-core Haswell 
CPU and 220 times more efficient than an 
NVIDIA K80 GPU, with even more potential 
for further optimization.
	
13.	
Two cutting-edge indigenous healthcare 
technologies developed by the scientists of 
IIT Delhi under the MeitY funded “Nanoelec-
tronics Network for Research and Applica-
tions (NNetRA)” were transferred to indus-
try on July 31, 2024.  “Photonic Chip-based 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
130
Spectrometric Biosensor” for pathogen de-
tection was transferred to UNINO Healthcare 
Private Limited, Mumbai, India. Technology 
named ‘DNA Aptamer for Prostate Cancer 
Detection’ has been transferred HUMMSA 
Biotech Pvt Ltd, Kolkata, India.
	
14.	
Smart Wearable Advanced nanoSensing 
Technologies in Healthcare ASICs (SW-
ASTHA)” at IIT Guwahati.
	
	
For the upscaling and commercialization of 
the technologies developed under the Cen-
tre of Excellence in Theranostics Devices at 
IIT Guwahati, a project entitled “Smart Wear-
able Advanced nanoSensing Technologies 
in Healthcare ASICs (SWASTHA)” is being 
supported by MeitY. 
	
	
Many projects including the development of 
an array of wearable, microfluidic and nano-
electronics technologies integrated with Ap-
plication Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs) 
for the detection of various diseases is being 
developed under SWASTHA. 
	
	
State of the art ISO 5 and 6 cleanroom fa-
cilities at the Centre for Nanotechnology, 
IIT Guwahati were inaugurated by the Sec-
retary, MeitY under the ground breaking 
project Smart Wearable Nanosensing Tech-
nologies in heathcare ASICs (SWASTHA) in 
February 2024. 
B.	
Startups in different domains have been 
incubated during the reporting period:
	
1.	
Matterwave Technologies Private Limit-
ed- startup incubated in August 2024 under 
the MeitY funded “Nanoelectronics Network 
for Research and Applications (NNetRA)” at 
IIT Bombay. 
	
2.	
Bengaluru based startup AGNIT Semi-
conductors secured 3.5 million dollar 
seed funding- AGNIT Semiconductors at 
IISc working on vertically integrated Gal-
lium Nitride (GaN) semiconductors, has 
raised $3.5 million in a seed round led by 
3one4 Capital and Zephyr in October 2024. 
The round also witnessed participation from 
Lakshmi Narayanan, former CEO of Cogni-
zant and noted angel investor. The company 
designs and manufactures GaN materials 
(wafers) and electronic components primar-
ily for radio-frequency applications. AGNIT’s 
GaN components offer performance-price 
footprint advantages for the defence and tel-
ecommunication industries. AGNIT’s patent-
protected technology comes from over 15 
years of R&D at IISc and spans the verticals 
of Gallium Nitride materials, manufacturing 
processes, and device design.
	
3.	
Proximal  Soilsens Private Limited, a start-
up incubated under MeitY funded project 
NNetRA at IIT Bombay has developed the 
NutriSens soil testing system, known for its 
accuracy and user-friendly interface. With 
Krishi Mangal’s support, Soilsens has scaled 
its operations in Maharashtra by building 
B2B channel partners and enhancing ground 
reach through a micro-entrepreneurship 
model.
C.	
Patent & Publications 
	
46 research articles have been published in 
National and International journals and 8 Patents 
have been filed in the reported duration.

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
131
Classification of publications under MeitY funded projects
5.3	
Centres of Excellence
5.3.1 Nanotechnology Centres
Nanotechnology 
Initiatives 
Division 
at 
MeitY 
has established several Centre of Excellence in 
Nanotechnology to take the basic R&D outcomes to 
the prototype and then to manufacture Nano devices, 
subsystems, systems for the social benefits.
1.	
Nanoscale Research Facility, NRF at IIT Delhi
	
A nanofabrication facility has been set up at IIT 
Delhi for developing nanofabrication processes 
and their use for making non-silicon nanoscale 
devices.
2.	
Inauguration of State-of-the-Art ISO 5 and 
6 Cleanroom Facilities at the Centre for 
Nanotechnology, IIT Guwahati
	
State of the art ISO 5 and 6 cleanroom facilities 
at the Centre for Nanotechnology, IIT Guwahati 
were inaugurated by the Secretary, MeitY under 
the ground breaking project Smart Wearable 
Nano sensing Technologies in healthcare ASICs 
(SWASTHA) in February 2024. 
3.	
Visit of Advisor to the Prime Minister of India 
Shri Tarun Kapoor at CeNSE IISc Bangalore
	
Advisor to the Prime Minister of India, visited the 
Centre for Nano Science and Engineering (CeNSE) 
at the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore 
on 11th October, 2024. Shri Kapoor commended 
the efforts in training a skilled workforce for 
the India Semiconductor Mission and showed 
a strong interest in the cutting-edge research 
being conducted at CeNSE. Shri Kapoor’s visit 
underscored the strategic importance of CeNSE’s 
research 
in 
advancing 
India’s 
technological 
capabilities, particularly in the semiconductor and 
nanoscience domains. 
5.3.2 Centre of Excellence on E-waste Management 
 
Centre 
of 
Excellence 
(CoE) 
on 
E-waste 
Management is a unique concept,  first of its kind 
in the country, to create physical infrastructure 
and knowledge hub for the development of cost-
effective technologies for E-waste recycling and 
dissemination of E-waste solutions to interested 
industries. 
 
Currently e-waste is handled either by informal 
sector in a rudimentary manner or exported to foreign 
countries for recycling and recovery of precious 
metals. In order to develop environmentally benign 
and affordable e-waste recycling technologies, 
 
CoE on E-waste management has been created 
at Centre for Materials for Electronics Technology 
(C-MET), Hyderabad on PPP Model with the 
aegis of Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (MeitY), Government of Telangana 
and Private industries (40:40:20).  
 
The main objective of CoE is to provide one 
stop solution for all kind of e-waste recycling 
technologies, 
strengthening 
the 
engineering 
ecosystem to improve process efficiency, design 
and development of affordable process equipment 
for e-waste recycling, extending consultancy 
services to interested industries, nurturing start-
ups etc. The CoE is hosting incubation facilities to 
create prototypes for addressing various facets of 
E-waste management. 
 
CoE also promotes start-ups to develop their 
innovative ideas, offer training to MSMEs for 
dismantling practices, attract informal E-waste 
recyclers to practice environmental recycling 
practices, providing training to empower the Indian 
electronics and electrical industries on the E-waste 
Management Rule (2023) through RoHS facility 
available at C-MET etc. An M.Tech programme 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
132
on E-waste Resource Engineering & Management 
is also initiated jointly by IIT, Hyderabad and 
C-MET for quality human resource development 
in e-waste space. CoE has already transferred 
e-waste recycling technologies to 22 industries for 
commercial production. 
5.3.3 	CoE on Rechargeable Battery Technology (Pre-
Cell) 
 
Lithium-Ion batteries are ideal power source 
for consumer electronics, e-mobility and power 
sectors. These batteries are also expected to find 
niche applications in e-governance electronics 
such as VVPAT machines. 
 
Current energy storage market in India includes 
applications such as mobile handsets and their 
accessories, solar rooftop, grid solar integration, 
wind integration, electric vehicles, inverter back-
ups, telecom, UPS, rural micro-grid and off-grid 
applications, diesel replacement, railways etc. 
 
India has vibrant Lead Acid battery manufacturing 
industry and needs to augment Li-ion battery cell 
manufacturing to meet current and future demands 
of energy storage. India primarily imports Li-ion 
cells and manufactures battery packs of different 
capacity for various applications. 
 
Government support in form of R&D funding 
for development of cost-effective end-to-end 
indigenous technology for manufacturing of 
rechargeable battery (Li-ion and post lithium) 
suited for Indian environment is vital for meeting 
the future demands. 
 
The support for R&D is expected to lower up-
front investment cost, utilize Indian supply chain, 
improve profit margin and bring SMEs into play 
for manufacturing industrial units of rechargeable 
battery cell manufacturing eco-system. 
 
In this direction, MeitY has initiated a self-
sustainable R&D centre entitled “Centre of 
Excellence 
(CoE) 
on 
Rechargeable 
Battery 
Technology (Pre-cell)” at CMET, Pune for scale up 
and transfer of indigenous technology on Lithium-
ion battery and Sodium ion battery (post lithium) to 
Indian SMEs for manufacturing of battery cells.
Sl. No.
Technology available for ToT
Description
1
Lithium cobalt oxide as cathode 
material for Li-ion batteries.
Cathode material 
for Li-ion Batteries
2
Lithium titanium oxide as anode 
material for Li-ion batteries
Anode material for 
Li-ion Batteries
3
Lithium 
(Nickel 
Manganese 
Cobalt) 
oxide 
as 
cathode 
material for Li-ion batteries.
Cathode material 
for Li-ion Batteries
4
Sodium Vanadium Phosphate 
(NVP) as cathode material for 
Na-ion batteries.
Cathode material 
for 
Na-ion 
Batteries
5.3.4	 CoE on Additive Manufacturing- Optoelectron-
ics Sector 
 
Additive Manufacturing (AM) is disruptive set of 
technologies which are bringing fundamental 
change in how manufacturing is carried out in many 
sectors due to its ability for mass customization. 
AM is enabler for digital manufacturing which 
has capability in producing products directly from 
design data by adding layers of material to obtain 
the final shape with minimal waste, supporting 
Industry 4.0. 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY) has initiated a Centre of Excellence on 
Additive Manufacturing at Centre for Materials 
for Electronics Technology (C-MET), Pune in 
collaboration with Central Institute of Plastics 
Engineering & Technology (CIPET), Bhubaneswar. 
 
The objectives of the centre are to support Indian 
Additive 
Manufacturing 
Eco-system 
through 
focused and coordinated research, design and 
development in collaboration with 3 participating 
industries. The centre is expected to achieve self-

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
133
sustenance and focus on developing indigenous 
materials and machine technologies for electronics 
manufacturing sector. 
 
In current phase of the project, 4 technologies 
with 4 different machines, 13 materials and 4 
different electronics application products are 
slated to be developed. The project is also bringing 
opportunities for Indian companies to develop 
their own AM material and machine technologies 
for global market at much reduced R&D cost for 
any sector (not limited to electronics) such as 
aerospace, medical, automotive etc. The centre is 
also training manpower to support growth of AM 
economy in India. 
5.3.5	  Centre for Programmable Photonic Integrated 
Circuit and Systems (CPPICS) 
 
Field Programmable Photonic Gate Array (FPPGA) 
core technology is a versatile photonic processor 
platform with potential applications in various 
sectors, including quantum computing, quantum 
communication, 5G/6G communications, IoT, 
radar, and avionics. 
 
The Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (MeitY) has established the Centre 
for Programmable Photonic Integrated Circuit and 
Systems (CPPICS) at IIT Madras. This initiative, 
in collaboration with the industry, aims to design, 
manufacture, and develop applications based on 
FPPGA cores using Silicon Photonics. 
 
The centre is expected to achieve self-sufficiency 
in five years, commercialize the products through 
startups, and train manpower to enhance the 
ecosystem of such manufacturing. The centre is 
partnering with Izmo Microsystems, Bangalore, 
to 
provide 
System-in-Package 
solutions 
for 
the proposed silicon photonics FPPGA cores. 
This collaboration will lead to the creation of 
commercially viable products for the proposed 
startup, thereby fostering innovation and growth in 
the field of photonics.
5.3.6 CoE on Additive Manufacturing: Medical Device 
Sector
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY) has initiated a Centre of Excellence 
on Additive Manufacturing at Andhra Pradesh 
MedTech Zone, Vishakapatnam, Andhra Pradesh 
which will support Medical Device Sector. 
 
The vision of the centre is to make COE at AMTZ 
a hub (common facility for local AM industry which 
will offset disabilities for competing with global 
peers) for medical device innovation in India by 
nurturing various medical device start-ups through 
Additive Manufacturing (AM) technology. 
 
Through 
this 
centre 
sustainable 
long-term 
ecosystem will be provided to start-ups and 
industries which will enable medical device 
innovation in India; build skill-sets in the AM 
industry, in particular AM in the medical industry 
to achieve competitive advantages in the global 
market; promote creation of Indian IPR & facilitate 
IPR filing activity and offer industry, academia, 
global linkages to provide market access to the 
incubated products. 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
134
 
The CoE has achieved several milestones both in 
skill development and technology development. 
Over 1500 manpower were trained in 3D printing, 
Medical Device Design, Prototyping and Testing in 
CoE AM - MDS. CoE is successful in establishing 
production of materials and products which 
earlier were under import dependency. One of 
the key product is UHMWPE, a novel orthoplastic 
engineered for its weight-bearing properties. This 
has been the major liner component for orthopaedic 
implants in hip and knee arthroplasty. The CoE also 
created capacities to deliver the highest quality 
small metal components with outstanding levels of 
chemistry control, strength, and density across a 
wide range of alloys.
Lounch of Indiginized SIA 3D Printer in National AM 
Symposium 2024, Delhi
5.3.7 National Centre on Additive Manufacturing 
(NCAM)  
 
National Centre for Additive Manufacturing (NCAM) 
has been formed by the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY), Telangana State 
Government & Industry at Hyderabad. The NCAM 
is a company registered under section 8(1) of the 
Companies Act 2013. 
 
The vision of NCAM is to develop a comprehensive 
Additive Manufacturing ecosystem in the country 
and position India as a Global AM Manufacturing 
Hub. Since its inception the centre has established 
state of the art facility which was Inaugurated on 
8th June 2023 by Shri Alkesh Kumar Sharma, 
IAS, Ex-Secretary Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY), GoI & Shri Jayesh 
Ranjan, IAS, Principal Secretary ITE&C and I&C, 
Government of Telangana & Chairman-NCAM 
along with other dignitaries. 
 
The centre is incubating a batch of 6 start-ups 
with a focus to generate IPR. NCAM launched the 
National Skill Development Awareness Marathon 
and conducted Training Programmes across 
various cities in India; conducted 25 Additive 
Expert Sessions and upskilled 20,000+ working 
professionals in partnership with the industry; 
conducted National Startup Technology Grand 
Challenge funded by Industry during AM Tech 
Expo at Hyderabad; conducted 65+ Workshops, 
23 Faculty Development Programs, and many 
webinars 
PAN 
India 
cumulatively. 
NCAM 
partnered with the industry and conducted seven 
international events so far in Delhi, Mumbai, 
Warrangal and Hyderabad. These events exhibited 
new technology and audience gained knowledge 
on the subject.
5.3.8 National Centre for Quantum Manufacturing 
Technology (NCQMT)
 
Naturally occurring quantum phenomena have 
revolutionized modern electronics, serving as the 
backbone of telecommunications, computing, and 
industrial automation, deeply ingrained in our daily 
digital lives. Engineered quantum effects herald 
the dawn of Quantum Technologies (QT), poised to 
reshape sectors like finance, defense, aerospace, 
and energy. 
 
In 
India, 
the 
integration 
of 
QT 
promises 
transformative impacts through advancements in 
communication infrastructure, cybersecurity, and 
computing capabilities. Realizing the potential of 
quantum technologies necessitates a concerted 
effort to translate research into market-ready 

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
135
innovations. 
The 
Prime 
Minister’s 
Science, 
Technology, and Innovation Advisory Council 
(PM-STIAC) have prioritized the Quantum Frontier 
Mission to foster developments in quantum 
computing, communication, and materials.
 
However, 
significant 
challenges 
lie 
ahead. 
Quantum Material Technologies (QMT) demand 
high-quality, reproducible materials conducive to 
high-temperature operations and miniaturization, 
alongside cost-effective manufacturing processes. 
Key to success is the consolidation of intellectual 
property rights and collaborative endeavours 
between industry and academia. 
 
To tackle these hurdles, the establishment 
of the National Centre for Quantum Material 
Technologies (NCQMT) at CMET, Pune, signifies 
a significant step forward. Through collaborative 
ventures with industry partners and the provision of 
indigenous materials, NCQMT aims to accelerate 
the development and deployment of quantum 
materials, driving India’s quantum revolution onto 
the global stage. With a commitment to innovation 
and collaboration, India can position itself as a 
front-runner in the burgeoning field of quantum 
technology.
5.3.9 Centre for Promotion of Additive Manufacturing: 
Optical Computing Chips (OCC)
 
Optical computational chips and photonic devices 
finds application in various fields of technologies 
such as communication, computation, healthcare, 
automation, 
sensor 
and 
defence. 
However, 
although they have shown plethora of applications, 
their industrial viability is mainly limited by their 
fabrication process which involves presence of 
foundries, numerous process- equipments and 
steps. 
 
In recent years, Additive Manufacturing (AM) 
processes are bringing fundamental change in how 
manufacturing is carried out in many sectors due to 
its ability for scalable, cost effective and sustainable 
fabrication process. AM is an enabler for digital 
manufacturing which has capability in producing 
products directly from design data by adding layers 
of material to obtain the final shape with minimal 
wastage. 3D printing in optical computing chip for 
global market
 
The Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (MeitY) has initiated a centre on 
Additive 
Manufacturing 
based 
Cost-Effective 
Optical Computing Chips at Indian Institute of 
Science, Bangalore (IISc) in collaboration with 
Centre for Materials for Electronics Technology 
(C-MET), Pune. 
 
The objective of the centre is to design and 
fabricate global state of the art 3D printer to achieve 
sub-micron resolution, indigenous materials for 
printing and to design & fabricate optical devices 
for computation. The centre is expected to 
achieve self-sustenance and focus on developing 
indigenous materials and machine technologies for 
photonics manufacturing sector. 
 
The centre is also bringing opportunities for Indian 
companies to develop their own AM material 
and machine technologies for global market 
at much reduced R&D cost for any sector (not 
limited to photonics) such as aerospace, medical, 
automotive etc. Till date the centre has designed 
and developed state of the art DLP light enginefor 
a full 3D printing machine and formulation of TiO2 
nanocomposites for low resolution printing.
5.3.10 Centre for Promotion of Additive Manufacturing 
- Agri & Food Processing (CPAM – A & FP)
 
The Center for Additive Manufacturing (CPAM), 
established under the Additive Manufacturing (AM) 
initiative of MeitY at the Centre for Development 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
136
of Advanced Computing, Kolkata, pioneers a 
groundbreaking concept of Agri-factories. 
 
These facilities integrate agri-produce lines with 
value-added agri-product lines, ensuring control 
over quality, quantity, and costs. Through this 
innovative approach, dependency on open agri-
produce markets diminishes.CPAM’s mission 
encompasses enhancing time-to-market, market 
resilience, and establishing product-independent 
manufacturing lines for value-added agri-products, 
introducing AM to the sector for the first time 
globally. 
 
Additionally, AM will streamline production by 
creating supply chain components such as 
agri-produce line modules and agri-photonics 
components, thereby reducing costs.
 
Collaborating with institutions like CSIR - Central 
Food Technological Research Institute, Mysuru, 
Central 
Manufacturing 
Technology 
Institute, 
Bengaluru, and IIM Calcutta Innovation Park, 
CPAM aims to indigenously develop the Agri-
Factory concept and AM machinery and materials. 
 
This initiative aligns with the government’s vision 
to propel Indian brands in international markets, 
particularly in the food processing sector, as 
evidenced by the significant investment outlined 
in the Ministry of Food Processing Industries’ 
annual report. CPAM’s vision to catalyze product-
oriented research and development in the agri and 
environment sectors is reinforced by its mission 
to enhance productivity, food safety, security, 
and inclusive growth through ICT and electronics-
driven solutions. 
 
The center’s objectives encompass controlling 
the quality and volume of agricultural lines, 
reducing infrastructure and food processing 
costs through 3D printing, fostering industry-
driven economics, and promoting indigenous 
machinery and supply chains. Its scope includes 
designing and establishing Agri-Factory test beds, 
developing Agri-Factory technology, establishing a 
business office for self-sustenance, and preparing 
techno-commercial roadmaps for Agri-Factory 
development.
5.3.11 National Additive Manufacturing Centre West 
(NAMC-W)
 
3D printing or Additive Manufacturing (AM) is driving 
the industry 4.0 revolution, poised as the next-gen 
digital manufacturing technology. Projections from 
M/s HUBS suggest that the AM market will burgeon 
to nearly $50 billion by 2026-27, transitioning from 
rapid prototyping to mass production, thereby 
enhancing 
manufacturing 
sustainability 
and 
supporting broader environmental objectives.
 
The Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (MeitY) unveiled the National Strategy 
of Additive Manufacturing (NSAM) in February 
2022, aiming to infuse $1 billion into the Indian 
AM market by 2025. Under this initiative, the 
“Establishment of National Additive Manufacturing 
Centre West (NAMCW) at Ganpat University, 
Gujarat – India” project, in collaboration with 
the State Government of Gujarat and industry 
stakeholders, seeks to augment AM adoption 
across six western states, aligning with NSAM’s 
aspirations.
 
NAMCW endeavours to create a self-sustainable 
facility for product development and training, 
promote the commercialization of AM products, 
foster skilled manpower, and instil future-ready skills 
among students through Science, Technology, 
Environmental, 
Advanced 
Manufacturing, 
or 
STEAM learning. By nurturing the domestic AM 
ecosystem through awareness programs, NAMCW 
aims to bolster inclusive growth and empower 
the AM manufacturing industry, spanning large 
enterprises, MSMEs, and startups, in line with the 
vision of ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’.
5.3.12 CoE on products based on Li-ion (Post Cell) 
 
The project “Establishment of Centre of Excellence 
(CoE) for Products Based on Li-ion Cells (Post-
Cell)” is an initiative of Government of India to 
boost the mobile and other electronic industries 
in the country. The project is being implemented 
by CDAC Noida in association with the Industry 
Association – India Cellular and Electronics 
Association (ICEA) & financially sponsored by 

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
137
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, 
Govt. of India and Department of IT & Electronics, 
Govt. of Uttar Pradesh. 
 
The genesis of CoE is to serve as a one stop facility 
centre for the design, development and testing of 
products related mobile handset accessories and 
other electronics applications. Specifically the 
products envisaged for development under CoE 
are Power Banks, Chargers, Wireless Chargers, 
Bluetooth Speakers, Smart Lighting Systems, 
Digital Radio, Headphones, Wearables, Solar 
Inverter, GPS Tag using NavIC, UPS System for IT 
Access,  Power Tank, Access Control using RFID/
Biometric. 
 
Besides this, the CoE provides training to students 
& professionals in electronic system design to 
bridge the gap of skilled manpower requirement of 
the industry. Also, to cater to the requirements of the 
electronic industries, the CoE offers consultancy 
services and encourage professionals to embrace 
entrepreneurship through development of SMEs in 
mobile industry & other electronics domains. 
 
The CoE shall adopt a self-sustainability model 
after the project duration by generating revenue 
through 
design 
services, 
testing 
services, 
consultancy services and trainings.  Also, the 
CoE has conducted “Grand Challenge” Contests 
for students & researchers to propagate design 
innovation in Indian development community.   
5.3.13 Centre of Excellence (CoE) in Intelligent 
Internet of Things (IIoT) Sensors
 
With 
the 
advancement 
of 
communication 
technologies in this modern era of digital 
connectivity, the concept of Internet of Things (IoT) 
has made its way into every walk of life. With the 
connected devices through IoT, it has become 
an easy affair to monitor and control any system 
remotely sitting anywhere in the world. One of 
the major parts of the IoT system is the sensors. 
They are the key components of intelligent devices 
capable of gathering data from different sources 
based on which decisions and actions will be taken 
by the smart devices. 
 
The IoT sensors, essentially find applications 
in 
diverse 
sectors 
including 
Health 
Care, 
Environment & Agriculture, Manufacturing, Energy 
management, Home automation, Smart Cities, 
Military & Space, Transportation, etc. A variety of 
IoT sensors including Light sensors, Accelerometer, 
Position sensors, Temperature sensors, Proximity 
sensors, Humidity sensors, Pressure sensors, 
Infrared sensors, Chemical sensors, gas sensors, 
gyroscope, etc. are required to cater to the whole 
spectrum of applications.  
 
Traditionally, majority of the companies in India, 
used the sensors for data collection and the data 
transmission was always done without any in-built 
intelligent processing. However, with the advent 
of Industry 4.0, the use of intelligent sensors is on 
the rise, with most sensors requiring self-correcting 
units, and intelligent data processing getting 
offloaded to the sensor nodes. This we believe 
is a fast-growing market with a large demand in 
industry.
 
To make Indian sensor market self-reliant and 
globally appealing, MeitY and Government of 
Kerala jointly funded a project on “Establishment of 
Centre of Excellence (CoE) in Intelligent Internet of 
Things (IIoT) Sensors”, which is being implemented 
jointly by C-MET, Thrissur and IIITMK, Trivandrum.
	
The salient features of the CoE are as follows:
 
• 
CoE is a collaborative programme of Central 
Government, State Government, Industries 
and R&D/academic institutes 
 
• 
Provides required R&D support to industries 
based on their problem statement. 
 
• 
CoE (IoT based Sensor) shall offer infra-
structure, materials development and pro-
cessing technologies, system design and 
packaging facility, etc.
 
• 
Creation of local IP to reduce the import bur-
den  
 
• 
Cost effective solutions as per industrial 
need
 
• 
Machine design and development 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
138
 
• 
Creation of start-ups/SMEs
 
• 
Services to Industries
 
• 
Testing lab as per International/national 
standards
 
• 
Training and Skill manpower development in 
the relevant areas
 
Under CoE several sensors were developed 
with different communication modules in-built. 15 
startups were incubated with the CoE and several 
skill development programmes were conducted by 
CoE.  We strongly believe that Government should 
make an ecosystem for manufacturing and testing 
of various types of sensors and an electronic 
hub for integration of artificial intelligence and 
communications to sensor-based devices.
5.3.14 India Innovation Centre for Graphene (IICG)
Graphene is a wonder material and possesses 
remarkable properties including high strength, electrical 
conductivity, flexibility, and transparency, which makes 
graphene as desirable material for applications in sectors 
like electronics, energy storage, construction, defence, 
aerospace, automotive, medicine etc. Advancements in 
extraction and production methods can lead to improved 
quality and scalability, enhancing its usability across 
different sectors. Considering the facts, MeitY, has 
been engaged in Research and Development (R&D) in 
Graphene extraction and development processes in order 
to future unlocking economic growth in technological 
advancements and contributing to sustainable solutions 
across various industries. 
India Innovation Centre for Graphene (IICG): The 
objective of this project is to set up the India Innovation 
Centre for Graphene (IICG) to focus on R & D, 
Innovation and Capacity building activities which leads 
to aknowledge centre that caters the following primary 
objectives:
	
Undertake R&D, Product Innovation and Capacity 
building activities in the area ofgraphene, and other 
2D material systems for sensors and actuators, 
energy 
storageand 
harvesting, 
graphene 
– 
CMOS integration, and wearable devices with a 
view todevelop indigenous technology, products, 
intellectual 
property 
rights 
(IPR) 
andtrained 
manpower.
	
The centre is slated to establish a State of the art 
Research and Capability building facility for
 
• 
Microelectronic and semiconductor devices
 
• 
Sensors and thin film devices
 
• 
Nan electrodes for inexpensive organic elec-
tronic devices such as organic
 
• 
photovoltaic (OPVs), liquid-crystal devices 
(LCDs), organic light-emitting
 
• 
diodes (OLEDs), or organic field effect tran-
sistors (OFETs)
 
• 
Energy conversion devices (e.g., Superca-
pacitors, fuel cells and batteries).
	
In addition, the centre aims
 
• 
To provide business and mentorship support 
to Start ups, companies along with the facili-
ties to realize an industry standard product 
solution with graphene and 2D materials
 
• 
To create skilled manpower and jobs in the 
area of emerging technologies in graphene 
and 2D materials development, design and 
fabrication of future electronic components 
and devices.
 
• 
To promote innovation and entrepreneur-
ship through design challenges, outreach 
programs, innovation and incubation grants.
 
Significant progress was made by IICG through 
DUK and CMET in developing  graphene-based 
heaters, energy storage materials, and sensors. 
Notable 
advancements 
include 
self-healing 
anti-corrosive coatings, improved transparent 
piezoelectric 
films, 
and 
polymer/graphene 
actuators for soft gripper applications. 16 patents 
have been filed, showcasing innovation across 
multiple domains.
	
IICG has successfully completed six Innovation 
Grants, 
awarding 
winners 
from 
prestigious 
organizations. Additionally, two Grand Challenges 
were conducted.  R&D training to about 300 
students was carried out through 3 certificate 

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
139
programs at DUK and 2 certificate courses at 
CMET.
Infrastructure for the IICG established at Kochi
The characterization Lab of IICG at C-MET
5.3.15  National Centre for Quantum Accelerator Chip 
using Lithium Niobate (NCQAC)
 
A quantum accelerator chip (QAC) promises 
to solve complex problems much faster than 
the 
best 
possible 
classical 
computers 
by 
exploiting 
fundamental 
quantum 
physical 
laws, e.g., superposition and entanglement. 
Photonic integrated circuits (PICs) with suitable 
programmability 
offer 
a 
promising 
solution 
for developing scalable quantum-accelerated 
processors operating at room temperature which 
have the potential for diverse applications such as 
drug design and development, weather forecasting, 
logistic and scheduling optimization, financial 
modeling, etc. 
 
Lithium niobate has many favorable material 
properties for building scalable, programmable, 
PIC-based QACs including a large transparency 
window covering the entire spectrum of available 
optical sources and devices, stable physical and 
chemical characteristics suitable for reliable 
fabrication 
methods, 
strong 
second-order 
nonlinearity along with the possibility of periodic 
polling that can be harnessed for the efficient 
generation and manipulation of qubits, strong 
electro-optic effect providing access to fast and 
energy-efficient switching.
 
The NCQAC at IIT Kharagpur, in partnership with 
C-MET, Pune, and M/S New Age Instruments and 
Materials, Gurgaon, aims to develop indigenous 
technologies (design, material, machine, process, 
packaging, and applications) for the LNOI PICs, 
validate them through ambient temperature QAC 
solutions, and deploy them for handling simulation 
and optimization problems in education and R&D 
sectors through R&D services and start-ups. 
5.3.16 Graphene Aurora
 
Graphene and related 2D materials have proven 
to show exceptional mechanical and electrical 
properties that make it an attractive alternative to 
build newer and better products. Today, Graphene 
is considered as a family of many 2D materials that 
is one atomic thick (monolayer) or in bulk form that 
can be added to existing products as a thin film or 
as a bulk material for developing several innovative 
solutions in the domains of building materials, 
sensors, 
electronics, 
electrical 
engineering, 
pharmaceuticals, etc.
 
Graphene-Aurora 
aspires 
to 
revolutionize 
Graphene translational research & democratize 
commercialization for overall graphene based 
industrial growth while supporting SMEs deliver 
the Graphene products through the Program.
 
This program compliments state of Kerala’s and 
Govt. of India commitment to translate graphene 
technology to scale deployment and has approved 
setting up of a large-scale Graphene Pilot 
Production facility (GPPF) beyond the proposed 
Graphene Aurora program, supporting ongoing 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
140
program with MeitY and ensure developing 
commercialization ecosystem through this Program 
Graphene Aurora.
 
The objectives are:
	
•	
Establishing world class Graphene material 
synthesisation for commercialization centre 
during the 5-year program period basis mar-
ket.
	
•	
Launch targeted translation Graphene in-
dustrialization program in collaboration with 
Industry and academia developing new ap-
plication and human intellect in Graphene-
Aurora graphene program.
	
•	
Build global and local collaboration with the 
OEMs, Industry players, Academia, SMEs, 
and startup for targeted industrial transla-
tional research projects.
	
•	
Build democratized commercialization route 
across states working with SMEs, Startups, 
and industry players with the help of State 
Government and central government to ac-
celerate technology absorption.
	
•	
Supporting SMEs / Startups and spin out 
startups in creating value through commer-
cialization of Graphene technology and en-
gaging in deep tech Translational research.
	
•	
Create a Graphene Technology & Commer-
cial bridge (hub) for business and thought 
leadership between different stakeholders.
Sr 
No
Expected Outcomes in Physical 
Terms Objective
Targets
Year
Self-Sustained 
of Funded
Program 
Target
Year 
1
Year 
2
Year 
3
Year 
4
Year 
5
Year 
6
Year 7
1
Number of Capacity building, industry 
internships and training Graphene 
Resources
100 Nos.
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
2
Number of Transfer ofTechnology to 
SME for commercialization
25 Tech  
Start-ups
3
5
7
10
10
10
3
No. of agreements with SMEs for 
commercialization roadmap
30 SMEs
1
4
5
10
10
15
15
4
Number of Graphene product
commercialisation
10 Products
3
3
4
5
Number of Technology and Business 
collaboration program launched
5 
Collaborations
2
1
1
1
1
1
6
Number of startups supported with 
Product development Grant
5 Start-Ups
2
2
1
5.3.17	 Startups Innovation & IPR
• 
India has evolved as the 3rd largest startup 
ecosystem in the world with more than 1,50,000 
startups operating in the country and 115 
unicorns with a total valuation of more than 
$ 350 Bn. Notwithstanding the raging global 
pandemic economic duress and other equally 
precarious challenges, the tech startup and the 
entrepreneurial ecosystem in the country have 
shown exemplary resilience and willingness to go 
beyond the norm. India now also boasts of more 
than 30,000 technology startups including 3,500 
deep-tech start-ups operating in different segments 
of emerging technology areas.
• 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY) in tandem with the well-laid down efforts to 
fast-track the tech startup ecosystem. Some of the 
flagship initiatives from the Ministry that includes 
Technology Incubation and Development of 
Entrepreneurs (TIDE 2.0), Centres of Excellence 
(CoEs) in diverse areas of national interest, 
MeitY Startup Hub (MSH), ‘Gen-Next Support for 
Innovative Startups (GENESIS)’ etc.
• 
New generation of start-ups emanating from these 
initiatives have taken up the cudgel of solving 
myriad problems ranging from governance to 
education, agriculture to healthcare in the country. 
Backed by robust efficiencies in the backend 

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
141
and exploiting cutting edge emerging digital 
technologies such as AI, IoT, Data analytics, 
machine learning augmented and virtual reality, 
advanced automation, robotics and mobility 
among others, these startups are creating new 
benchmarks for themselves and for the world with 
wide scope for IP based solutions and products.
• 
MeitY has put in a well laid down mechanism to 
incubators and accelerator levels to sensitize, 
identify, protect and maintain the IP assets being 
generated in the country. So apart from creating 
funding opportunities for the startups it is also 
prioritizing sensitivity towards the need for IP 
generation in the country and has adopted a multi- 
pronged approach. 
• 
The Startups Innovation and IPR Division of 
MeitY has unleashed a slew of initiatives for 
the benefit of technology startups dealing in IT/
ITeS and Electronics domains. These initiatives 
range from Technology Incubation Development 
for Entrepreneurs (TIDE 2.0) Scheme, domain 
specific Centres of Excellence (CoEs), SIPEIT for 
supporting filing of IPRs, etc. for benefitting startups 
and MSMEs. Some of the recent initiatives have 
been elucidated here:
• 
GENESIS (Gen-Next Support for Innovative 
Startups): MeitY has recently approved an 
overarching ‘Gen-Next Support for Innovative 
Startups (GENESIS)’ Scheme with a budgetary 
outlay of Rs. 490 Crore for a duration of 5 years to 
accelerate and enhance the fast-rising tech startup 
ecosystem. The Scheme aims to boost the startup 
ecosystem in Tier-II & Tier-III cities and upcoming 
towns in the country with emphasis on collaborative 
engagement among startups, government and 
corporates. GENESIS envisages further scaling 
up and sustaining the tech ecosystem especially 
to discover, support, grow and make successful 
startups. The platform envisages impacting and 
consolidating 10,000+ tech start-ups over the 
course of the next 5 years to pave the road for 
an equal startup ecosystem. Various outreach 
activities and awareness sessions in leading startup 
events were conducted to broadly disseminate 
information about the scheme pan India.  A total 
of 65 implementing agencies are approved for 
implementation of the GENESIS scheme and 
functional to support the startups under the scheme
• 
MeitY Start-up Hub (MSH): To give wings to 
MeitY’s vision of promoting technology innovation, 
start-ups and creation of Intellectual Properties, a 
nodal entity called MeitY Start-up Hub (MSH) has 
been setup under its aegis. MSH is a dynamic, 
singular and collaborative platform for tech startup 
community towards building meaningful synergies 
in the Indian startup space. MSH’s quick value 
additions to domestic tech startups in terms 
of improving scalability, market outreach and 
domestic value addition and setting up innovative 
partnerships with various stakeholders has been a 
key differentiator in MSH’s efforts to catapult the 
tech startup ecosystem  in the country. MSH also 
has a mandate for capacity building of different 
tech incubation centres pan India, capitalizing on 
strengths of different centers to pull out moderately 
weaker centres into mainstream activity. MSH 
is acting as a hub and ensuring synergies 
among all the TIDE 2.0 Centres, theme based 
incubation centres, domain specific Centre of 
Excellences on Emerging Technologies and other 
existing platforms for facilitating criss-crossing of 
technology resources, sharing best practices and 
ideas across the entire gamut of innovation and 
startup  ecosystem. MSH has seen a consolidation 
of 5200+ startups, 490+ incubators, 470+ mentors 
and 43+ state of the art Centres of Excellence 
(CoEs) and 23+ Accelerators.
• 
TIDE 2.0 Scheme: MeitY had initiated TIDE 
2.0 scheme in 2019 with an outlay of Rs 264.62 
Crores over a period of 5 years to promote 
tech entrepreneurship through financial and 
technical support to incubators engaged in 
supporting ICT startups primarily engaged in 
using emerging technologies such as IoT, AI, 
Block-chain, Robotics etc. in seven pre-identified 
areas of societal relevance. The Scheme will be 
implemented through 51 incubators through a 
three tiered structure with an overarching objective 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
142
to promote incubation activities at institutes of 
higher learning and premier R&D organizations, 
eventually leading to handholding of approximately 
2000 tech start-ups over a period of five years. 
Towards this end TIDE 2.0 has been able to 
provision an empowering mechanism to establish 
necessary collaboration among the different actors 
of tech startup ecosystem to grow and benefit them 
through complementary strengths. As of now 51 
TIDE 2.0 Incubation Centres have been approved 
and made operational.
	
Point-wise key achievements: 
 
• 
1485+ startups supported across 51 Incuba-
tion Centres
 
• 
560+ low engagement programmes con-
ducted 
 
• 
85+ deep engagement programmes con-
ducted
 
• 
140+ Challenge Grant/ Hackathons
 
• 
510+ training workshops Conducted
 
• 
900+ products/prototype/mvp Developed
 
• 
300+ patents filed
 
• 
250+ Trademarks registered/ copyrights 
filed
 
• 
300 Cr Turnover of graduated startups
 
• 
600+ Startups graduated
 
• 
9000+ employments generated
• 
Domain 
specific 
Centres 
of 
Excellence 
(CoEs): To improve and transform innovation-led 
ecosystems in the country MeitY in partnership 
with various stakeholders has opened a clutch of 
domain specific Centres of Excellence (CoE) in 
order to create cohesive technology solutions built 
around the emerging technologies and  support the 
next wave of budding entrepreneurs pan India. A 
brief of such initiatives are put forth below:  
	
(i)	
Centre of Excellence (CoE) on FinTech at 
Chennai: MeitY has initiated a Centre of Ex-
cellence (CoE) on FinTech at STPI, Chennai 
to provide infrastructure, resources, coach-
ing/ mentorship, technology support and 
funding to emerging start-ups in the FinTech 
sector. The proposed CoE would establish 
ecosystem around FinTech with the lat-
est trends and technologies in the financial 
services sector through a collaborative ap-
proach including NPCI, UIDAI and Partner 
Banks. The purpose of the FinTech CoE is 
to create holistic ecosystem so as to ena-
ble start-ups to experiment their innovative 
financial products or services within a well 
defined space and duration. The project 
aims to support 58 start-ups over a period 
of 5 years. Through this CoE, 60+ startups 
supported, 180+ products/prototypes de-
veloped, 27+ IPR filed, 1080+ employment, 
26+ Crore revenue generated and 16+ Crore 
funding raised by supported startups.
	
(ii)	
IOT OpenLab-a Centre of Excellence 
(CoE) for Internet of Things at STPI Ban-
galore: An IOT OpenLab - a Centre of 
Excellence (CoE) for Internet of Things in 
partnership with Arrow Electronics at STPI 
Bangalore has been initiated to provide aca-
demic and business mentoring of the start-
ups in the IOT emerging technology area for 
developing products and/ or services around 
IoT along with networking opportunities for 
the startups. The IoT OpenLab intends to 
support and nurture 100 start-ups per year 
with an overall target to support 500 startups 
over a period of 5 years. Through this CoE, 
59+ startups supported, 44+ products, 32+ 
prototypes developed, 34+ IPR filed, 2476+ 
employment, 66.49+ Crore revenue gener-
ated and 32.9+ Crore funding raised by sup-
ported startups.
	
(iii)	
ESDM Incubation Centre at Bhubaneswar 
by STPI: MeitY has approved ESDM Incu-
bation Centre with the objective of creating 
a holistic eco-system to promote ESDM in-
novation, R&D and create Indian intellectual 
property in the Eastern Region of the country. 
The centre will be operated through STPI, 
Odisha in collaboration with Government of 

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
143
Odisha, IIIT Bhubaneswar and IESA. It aims 
to leverage 40 start-ups over the period of 5 
years. This eco-system is necessary to de-
velop, promote, incubate, mentor and create 
breakthrough innovations towards develop-
ment of product and IP creation in the ESDM 
sector. Through this CoE, 30+ startups sup-
ported, 26+ products, 70+ PoC developed, 
25+ IPR filed, 540+ employment, 8.5+ Crore 
revenue generated and 11+ Crore funding 
raised by supported startups.
	
(iv)	
Centre of Excellence (CoE) on Medi-Elec-
tronics & Health Informatics at Lucknow: 
MeitY has initiated a Centre of Excellence 
(CoE) on Medi-Electronics & Health Infor-
matics at Lucknow to stimulate the estab-
lishment and growth of technology-based 
start-ups in the field of medical electronics 
and health informatics by providing the nec-
essary infrastructure, mentoring, marketing, 
funding and eco-system required for their 
success and growth. The Medi-Electronics 
& Health Informatics CoE is being setup at 
SGPGI, Lucknow with Department of IT and 
Electronics, UP Govt. as funding partner, 
AiMED as industry partner, AMTZ as in-
dustry and seed funding partner and Kalam 
Institute of Health Technology as academic 
partner. The project aims to support 50 start-
ups over a period of 5 years. Through this 
CoE, 46+ startups supported, 17+ products, 
32+ prototypes developed, 6+ IPR filed, 
200+ employment, 2.16+ Crore revenue 
generated and 2.97+ Crore funding raised 
by supported startups.
	
(v)	
Centre of Excellence (CoE) in Emerging 
Technologies (EmTek) at Bhubaneshwar 
with Satellite Center at Rourkela: MeitY 
has established CoE in Emerging Technol-
ogy (EmTek) at STPI Bhubaneshwar with 
Satellite center at BPUT, Rourkela to sup-
port startups in Industry 4.0 technologies 
viz. Data Analytics, Machine Learning, Cy-
ber Security & Artificial Intelligence (AI) & be 
the preferred Start-Up destination in Industry 
4.0 in Odisha. EmTeK CoE is being setup 
with Electronics & IT Dept, Govt. of Odisha, 
MeitY, STPI as funding partners, NALCO, 
SAIL-RSP, Maxbyte as industry partners. 
The EmTeK CoE aims to support 150 start-
ups over a period of 5 years. Through this 
CoE, 10+ startups are in the process of on-
boarding for incubation.
	
(vi)	
Centre of Excellence in Intellectual Prop-
erty (CoE-IP): A robust ICT-IPR ecosystem 
can help capitalize on the growth-enhancing 
effects of innovation vis-à-vis ICT.  MeitY 
recognizes the importance of creating a con-
ducive framework for IPR protection and has 
unleashed a slew of initiatives over the years 
to protect intellectual assets emanating from 
our country. CoE-IP forms the fulcrum of all 
MeitY IPR initiatives. It was setup essentially 
to support independent inventor community, 
academicians, MeitY societies, SMEs and 
startups with a clutch of IP related services. 
CoE-IP offers a gamut of IPR related ser-
vices like IPR queries Prior Art searches, 
Patent filing assistance, invention analysis, 
Patent Landscape reports etc. especially 
curated for ICT based innovators. These 
service along with handling IPR queries and 
landscape reports is offered free of cost to 
the user community. 
•	
Theme based Incubation Centres: With an 
aim to support the economic development of 
local region through supporting start-ups and 
businesses that will lead to creation of a more 
vibrant local entrepreneurial ecosystem, theme-
based incubation centres under the aegis of MeitY 
has been setup across India. MeitY has initiated the 
following state of the art Theme based Incubation 
Centres: 
	
(i)	
Establishment of Incubator for Elec-
tronics Start-ups in Delhi-NCR (Electro-
preneur Park): The Electropreneur Park 
established in collaboration with Software 
Technology Parks of India (STPI), India Elec-
tronics & Semiconductor Association (IESA) 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
144
and Delhi University (DU) with state of the art 
facilities at South Campus, Delhi University. 
The project aims to support 50 start-ups. As 
on date, the Electropreneur Park has sup-
ported 59 startups till date out of which 50 
startups were incubated physically while 9 
were incubated virtually. Till date 21 startups 
are in revenue generating phase. As an out-
come, 129 new products, 183 working proto-
types have been developed, 66 patents filed 
out of which 10 patents granted, Rs. 25.79 
Cr 	 funding received by the onboard start-
ups, Rs. 149.75 Crore revenue generated by 
startups with a valuation of Rs. 640 Crores 
and 910 number of employment generated 
by the startups. 
	
(ii)	
Electronics Incubator by IIITM-Kerala and 
KSUM at Cochin, Kerala:The project for 
setting up of Consumer Electronics Incuba-
tor at Cochin, Kerala by Indian Institute of 
Information Technology and Management 
Kerala (IIITM-K) and M/s Kerala Startup 
Mission (KSUM) aims to creation of new 
enterprises focused on Consumer Electron-
ics through a holistic incubation ecosystem. 
This Incubator will incubate 40 startups over 
a period of 4 years. Infrastructure setup is 
completed. Testing and Equipment / IOT, 
Robotics Lab and Prototyping Room for 
SMT Assembly Line completed. As an out-
come, 178 startups are incubated in the 
IC out of which 78 startups graduated, 97 
products and 52 working prototypes gener-
ated, 81 Patents filed out of which 32 pat-
ents granted in addition 43 copyrights and 
38 trademarks registered, 2275 employment 
generated, 220 Crore funding received and 
Rs. 212 Crore revenue generated by the on-
board startups till date. 
	
(iii)	
Setting up of Incubation Centre in the 
area of ESDM with focus on Medical Elec-
tronics at IIT Patna: The incubation facility 
developed through MeitY and State Govern-
ment partnership aims to incubate 50 start-
ups over a period of 5 years. The primary 
objective of this is to promote innovation and 
entrepreneurship with the aim to identify, 
nurture and translate technological ideas 
and innovation in the broad area of ESDM 
sector with a focus in Medical Electron-
ics. Till date, 112 start-ups have been sup-
ported. As on date, 36 patents have been 
filed by the startups out of which 13 patents 
were granted, 51 products and 21 working 
prototypes have been developed 472 em-
ployment generated, 10.46 Crore funding 
received and Rs. 25.17 Crore revenue gen-
erated by the onboard startups till date. 
• 
Support for International Patent Protection 
in E&IT (SIP-EIT) Scheme for SMEs: Ministry 
of Electronics & Information Technology (MeitY) 
had initiated a scheme titled “Support for 
International Patent Protection in E&IT (SIP-EIT) 
that encourages international patent filing by 
Indian MSMEs and start-ups so as to encourage 
innovation and recognize the value and capabilities 
of global IP.  Reimbursement provided under the 
scheme is upto a maximum of Rs.15 lakhs per 
invention or 50% of the total expenses incurred 
in filing and processing of patent application upto 
grant whichever is lesser. A significant component 
of the SIP-EIT scheme is to provide financial 
support to academic institutions, industry bodies 
and MeitY’s autonomous societies for conducting 
IPR awareness workshops pan India in ICT 
domain which aims to sensitize about Intellectual 
Property Rights and their protection among various 
stake holders consisting of students of engineering 
colleges, academia, startup community and 
business fraternity 
	
During the scheme tenure SIPEIT had supported a 
total of 80 applications approved from MSMEs and 
tech startups for international patent filing out of 
which 37 applied for reimbursement. With respect 
to the IPR awareness component, over 100 IPR 
Awareness workshops were conducted pan India 
in total including 2 International workshops.
• 
IPR facilitation programme: Under IPR facilitation 
programme of MeitY, The Innovation & IPR Division, 

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
145
MeitY has been supporting its R&D societies and 
grantee institutions under various R&D projects for 
filing of different IPRs namely Patents, Trademarks, 
Copyrights and Industrial designs. The support 
includes end to end facilitation including prior art 
search, filing and maintenance of the IP assets in 
the form of annuities. The assignee ownership of 
IPRs is as per terms & conditions governing the 
GIA for particular R&D project. Through MeitY IPR 
Patent facilitation 418 patents have been filed out of 
which 180+ patents were granted, 529 copyrights 
filed and 168 trademarks applied.
5.4 Societal Reach R&D
5.4.1  Medical Tools, Equipments and Software 
(i)	
Design and Development of 1.5 Tesla Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging (MRI) Systems: 
	
The objective of the proposed project is to design, 
develop and test an indigenous 1.5 Tesla MRI 
System for medical imaging to provide a cost-
effective solution and accessible MRI for people of 
our country. 
	
Comprehensive quality assurance tests on ACR 
phantoms have been completed, while embedded 
coil development is ongoing. Multichannel imaging 
trials on knee and spine regions with human 
volunteers demonstrated clinical readiness. The 
indigenous 1.5T magnet has reached its final 
testing phase and will soon be integrated at 
SAMEER Mumbai, advancing India’s self-reliance 
in MRI technology and healthcare innovation.
	
SAMEER signed MoUs and NDAs with seven 
leading industry players, marking a major step in 
transferring IMRI technology to industry. Testing 
with a 20kg phantom using body transmit and 
receive coils yielded images across multiple 
sequences, 
including 
Spin 
Echo, 
Inversion 
Recovery, GRASS, and Turbo Spin Echo. Rigorous 
efforts have improved image quality, aided by 
a state-of-the-art RF amplifier integrated with 
System I.
(ii)	
High energy 30 MeV linear accelerator (LINAC): 
	
The objective of the project is to design & develop 
a 30MeV electron Linear Accelerator with 5-10kW 
beam power. The proposed LINAC will generate 
Medical isotopes (Molybdenum -99) which will 
be used to elute radioisotope Technetium (Tc-
99m). It is envisioned that the High Energy Linear 
Accelerator (HEL) to be housed at INMAS would 
produce Mo99, which would then be transported 
to hospitals  for medical diagnostics,  industrial 
applications or for non-destructive testing in 
strategic sector. The advantages will be production 
of isotopes without involving hazardous, explosive 
or fissile materials, almost no nuclear waste and 
with normalized capital costs. 
	
SAMEER is advancing electron acceleration to 
achieve energies of up to 30 MeV with a power 
range of 5 to 10 kW. This high-energy linear 
accelerator 
(linac) 
promises 
transformative 
applications 
in 
medicine, 
including 
isotope 
research and development, neutron imaging, and 
various industrial uses. The system has been fully 
integrated, and vacuum processing is currently 
underway. A stable 20 MeV beam has already 
been achieved, with plans to enhance the energy 
output soon.
	
The control system for the entire accelerator 
complex has been designed and developed by 
the SAMEER team and is now fully operational. 
Hardware functionality tests have been successfully 
completed, and the integrated console is capable 
of synchronizing all devices, managing interlocks, 
and coordinating with all subsystems. Fine-tuning 
of the console remains in progress to ensure 
optimal performance.            
(iii)	
Digitally Connected Tribal Colonies (DCTC): 
	
The project aims to develop and implement 
advanced technological solutions for screening 
common Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs), 
including Oral and Cervical Cancer, Diabetic 
Retinopathy, and other retinal diseases. Digital 
pathology services are being utilized for remote 
diagnostic support, complemented by a robotic 
system for slide digitization. The initiative also 
focuses on establishing ICT infrastructure to 
digitally connect tribal communities in Wayanad 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
146
District, Kerala, providing improved healthcare and 
education services. To achieve these objectives, 
the project is developing an indigenized Fundus 
camera and a robotics system for slide digitization. 
The first prototype of the Fundus camera, 
integrated with AI capabilities for Microscopy and 
Funduscopy, has been completed. Certification 
processes with the Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organization (CDSCO) are currently underway for 
the developed products. Additionally, discussions 
for Technology Transfer (ToT) are in progress with 
industry partners interested in the slide digitizer 
and Fundus camera.
 
The project has made significant strides in 
addressing Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs) 
in 
underserved 
communities, 
particularly 
in 
Wayanad district, Kerala. Cancer awareness 
programs and NCD screening camps have been 
actively conducted across the district. A mobile app-
based door-to-door health survey, facilitated by 
trained project staff, has been launched to identify 
high-risk individuals within tribal communities for 
targeted screening. A dedicated screening hub, 
equipped with tools and devices developed by 
C-DAC, is operational in Wayanad for AI-assisted 
sample processing and analysis. This innovative 
model, with its documented workflow for NCD 
prevention, offers a scalable and replicable solution 
that can be implemented across India.
	
In recognition of its impactful efforts, C-DAC, 
Trivandrum, received the 2024 United Nations 
Inter-Agency Task Force Award for outstanding 
contributions to the prevention and control of 
NCDs and mental health conditions. The award 
was announced on September 25, 2024, at 
the 79th United Nations General Assembly in 
New York. C-DAC’s Health Technology Group 
was honored for its work in screening the tribal 
population of Wayanad for cervical cancer, oral 
cancer, and diabetic retinopathy. The screening 
hub leverages C-DAC’s cutting-edge technologies 
for mass screening, while a custom survey app 
and dashboard enable efficient door-to-door 
health surveys and follow-up tracking. This 
initiative highlights the transformative potential of 
technology in saving lives and improving healthcare 
accessibility in underserved regions.
(iv)	
Design 
and 
Development 
of 
Ultrasonic 
Transducer Probes for Medical Imaging: 
	
The ongoing project focuses on the indigenous 
development of Ultrasound (US) probes for medical 
imaging, addressing India’s reliance on imports in 
this high-demand market. This initiative supports 
the government’s Make-in-India and Atma Nirbhar 
Bharat initiatives, aiming to achieve self-reliance 
in advanced medical technologies. The project 
is a multi-institutional collaboration involving 
stakeholders like C-MET Thrissur, NIELIT Calicut, 
MCC Kannur, and industry partners.
	
Functional layers such as piezo, backing, and 
matching layers were developed per specifications, 
alongside clinical protocols for ethical committee 
clearance. These advancements mark a significant 
step toward self-reliant medical imaging solutions 
in India. Key milestones include the development 
and characterization of 3.5 MHz and 10 MHz 
single-element transducer probes per IEC 62359 
standards, with successful phantom imaging. 
A 128-element curvilinear US probe with a 3.5 
MHz central frequency was prototyped. Imaging 
capability was demonstrated using test phantoms. 
(v)	
Self-contained X-ray blood irradiator system: 
	
The project aims to replace high activity radioactive 
sources that could pose a risk with non-radioisotope-
based technologies. Radioisotope disposal is also 
becoming a big challenge throughout the world. 
Advanced nations have already migrated to these 
systems. The project is being implemented by 
SAMEER, Mumbai.
	
The technologies involved in engineering and 
development 
of 
self-contained 
X-ray 
blood 
irradiator (BI) system are heterogeneous and has 
major hi-tech components like orthovoltage X-ray 
tube, High voltage power supply, Dosimetry and 
dose delivery, Control electronics and interlocks, 
Irradiated products database management system, 
Water cooling system, Pb shielding etc. 

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
147
	
The integrated X-ray System testing including 
X-ray 
tubes, 
High 
voltage 
power 
supplies 
and water-cooling system is completed at 
Radiation Shielded facility, SAMEER, Mumbai 
SAMEER, Mumbai have developed a prototype 
‘Xray Blood Irradiation System’ and its dose 
characterization, 
qualifying 
AERB 
QA 
tests 
is completed inside radiation shielded facility. 
(vi)	
Design & Development of EEG Based Real-
Time Depth of Anaesthesia (DoA) Monitoring 
System: 
	
The project aims to develop a machine learning 
model which will be trained using a locally compiled 
clinical database of Electroencephalogram (EEG) 
recordings. Since, the proposed DoA monitor will 
work on a large amount of EEG recordings as 
well as on the patient specific data, it will improve 
the accuracy of the DoA estimation without any 
restrictions on the type of anesthetic drug used 
or the patient’s age. The machine learning model 
will then be realized on Field Programmable Gate 
Array (FPGA) to validate the software simulation 
results on hardware. The proposed DoA system 
will be an indigenous EEG based Real-Time Depth 
of Anesthesia Monitoring System. 
	
Clinical EEG data from 1,333 surgical patients 
have been collected. Twelve key EEG features 
were identified using reverse feature elimination, 
and a Neural Network model was developed, 
achieving 88.21% accuracy with 11 EEG features 
and 4 patient details. Cross-validation methods 
were implemented, and hyperparameter tuning is 
currently underway.
	
The hardware architecture and RTL for the Pre-
Processing Unit (PPU), Feature-Extraction Unit 
(FEU), and Classifier Unit (CLU) have been 
developed. PPU and FEU were integrated and 
evaluated on FPGA, while CLU was tested at 
the unit level. Complete system implementation 
on FPGA is underway, with synthesis and timing 
analysis performed using Synopsys EDA tools. 
Floorplanning, 
clock 
tree 
synthesis 
(CTS), 
placement, and routing are in progress.
(vii)	 Development of focused Compact Microwave 
Hyperthermia Applicator for small cancerous 
tumors: 
	
The project focuses on developing a microwave-
based hyperthermia applicator for therapeutic 
cancer 
treatment. 
Hyperthermia 
technique 
gaining significant attention in recent years, 
involves controlled exposure of tissues or organs 
to temperatures between 41°C and 45°C using 
radio waves and microwaves. This project aims 
to design and develop a noninvasive, focused 
applicator operating within the ISM band (2.45 
GHz) to treat superficial melanoma lesions or small 
tumors on areas such as the face, neck, and nose. 
By introducing focused treatment and monitoring, 
the project presents an innovative approach to 
addressing these medical conditions.
	
A prototype applicator, featuring a double spiral 
antenna and a reflector structure, was developed, 
fabricated and tested. The testing involved two 
distinct measurement setups, incorporating the 
applicator and a simulated high-salinity liquid (HSL) 
within the ISM band at 2.45 GHz. The primary 
goal was to measure the Specific Absorption Rate 
(SAR) at various depths.
(viii)	 Setting up of Medical Electronics Laboratory 
for Calibration and Maintenance of Medical 
Electronics Devices & Equipment: 
	
The aim of the project is to set up a Medical 
Electronics Laboratory at NRTC, Parwanoo to 
facilitate the hospitals, clinical laboratories, medical 
institutes and manufacturers of medical devices 
at Himachal Pradesh and nearby region and to 
generate skilled manpower by providing training 
to youth of the state for maintenance of medical 
electronics equipment. 
	
Medical Electronics laboratory by procuring, 
installation and Commissioning of    equipment 
has been accomplished. NABL Accreditation to the 
Laboratory as per ISO/IEC 17025: 2017 has been 
granted in August 2023 in the Discharge Equipment/ 
Devices, 
Patient 
Conditioning/ 
Maintenance, 
Monitoring Unit, Imaging/ Plotters groups. MoU 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
148
has been signed with NIELIT Shimla to jointly 
convene the program. Renewal of accreditation of 
the laboratory was also applied to NABL in August 
2024 and assessment of the lab was conducted by 
National level assessors in October 2024. Training 
for the first batch is yet to be started. 
(ix)	
Development of Indigenized Digital Dentistry 
Solutions targets development of indigenized 
and cost-effective solutions for Digital Dentistry 
which can streamline clinical workflow of dental 
procedures and benefit patients and clinicians 
alike. 
	
The project targets to develop the entire ecosystem 
for Digital Dentistry which being (1) Cone Beam 
CT Scanner (b) Extra Oral Scanner (c) Intra 
Oral Scanner and (d) Virtual Dental Treatment 
Planning software. The project activities have been 
initiated with C-DAC, Thiruvananthapuram being 
nodal implementing agency with support from 
Centre for Dental Education & Research, AIIMS, 
New Delhi and Indian Institute of Technology - 
Madras.   C-DAC has floated Expression of Interest 
for Industry participation from the project planning 
phase aiding better Technology Adoption by 
industries.
	
A workshop with participation by user agencies, 
domain experts and industries was conducted 
on 29th  Jan ‘2024 titled “Digital Dentistry & Oral 
Health”. Requirement collection for CBCT, Extra 
Oral Dental 3D Scanners and Virtual Treatment 
Planning & Simulation Software is completed. 
Prototype of Extra Oral Dental Scanner and VTPS 
(with features for MPR, Panoramic, Slice view 
and Airway) were complete and now undergoing 
evaluation. Design of CBCT Test Bench is complete 
and Component procurement is in progress.
(x)	
The development of an Integrated Surgical 
Platform with Navigation, Robot, Simulation, 
& Training for Total Knee Arthroplasty targets 
the creation of a cutting-edge, indigenous, 
and cost-effective solution for Total Knee 
Arthroplasty (TKA).
 
This initiative seeks to advance clinical workflows 
in TKA surgeries, ultimately benefiting both patients 
and clinicians. The project envisions establishing a 
holistic ecosystem for TKA, comprising:
 
• 
Image-Guided Surgical Navigation System
 
• 
Robotic-Assisted TKA System
 
• 
Preplanning and Simulation Platform with 
VR/AR/MR/XR
	
The project is jointly undertaken by the Indian 
Institute of Technology Madras (IITM) and the 
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
(C-DAC), 
Thiruvananthapuram, 
with 
clinical 
collaboration from AIIMS Delhi and Bhagwan 
Mahaveer Jain Hospital, Bangalore. IIT Madras has 
issued an Expression of Interest (EOI) to involve 
industry players from the project’s early stages. 
This ensures streamlined technology adoption and 
facilitates smoother commercialization by achieving 
Technology Readiness Level (TRL)-9, the project 
aims to make these systems accessible, affordable, 
and tailored to the needs of healthcare providers 
in Tier II and III cities, reducing dependency on 
imports and improving clinical outcomes in TKA 
surgeries.
(xi)	
Under the MeitY R&D initiative, in collaboration 
with the Centre for Development of Advanced 
Computing (CDAC), Pune, and AIIMS Delhi, the 
iOncology.ai AI platform has been developed to 
support doctors in the early detection of breast and 
ovarian cancer—two of the most common cancers 
in women in India. The platform integrates six AI 
models that analyze CT, USG, histopathology, and 
mammogram images, as well as a mammogram 
MIAS object detection and classification model. 
These models, tested with patient data from AIIMS, 
achieved prediction accuracy exceeding 75% for 
both breast and ovarian tumors.
	
By leveraging AI-based clinical decision support 
systems, the platform can process large amounts 
of patient data, including genetic information, 
to generate personalized treatment plans, thus 
improving the effectiveness of cancer treatments. 
Additionally, the platform facilitates early cancer 
detection through the analysis of medical images, 
enabling quicker interventions and better patient 

Innovate and Design in India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
149
outcomes. iOncology.ai has already been deployed 
in seven hospitals across the country.
5.4.2	 Training Programmes for Scheduled Caste 
& Schedule Tribe Communities and North East 
Communities of India 
EMDP programme has been building knowledge on 
electronics manufacturing for last several decades and 
as part of its outreach for weaker sections of the societies 
EMDP has initiated several projects on manpower training 
among SC/ST and NE communities. These projects 
are supporting entrepreneurship programmes in the 
areas of E-waste management, Circular Economy and 
Resource Efficiency and RoHS laboratory manpower. 
State governments are also taking active participation 
in these projects through State Pollution Control Boards 
(SPCB) and Institute of Human Resource Development 
(IHRD). Many batches of entrepreneurship programmes 
have passed out. Details of these programs are provided 
below:
• 
Capacity 
building 
through 
skill 
and 
entrepreneurship development on e- Waste 
management PU Chandigarh
	
In order to develop skilled manpower and 
entrepreneur in the area of E-waste dismantling 
and segregation, a project on “Capacity building 
through skill and entrepreneurship development 
on e-Waste management” is being implemented 
by Panjab University Chandigarh with the active 
participation of industry partner M/s Exigo 
Recycling Pvt. Ltd, under the Circular Economy in 
EEE sector initiatives of Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology, Govt. of India. A standard 
content on e-waste dismantling and segregation 
has been developed to provide training to the 
candidates of nearby states/UT i.e Haryana, 
Panjab, Himachal Pradesh and Chandigarh. An 
E-waste segregation and dismantling training 
centre also has been set up at PU Chandigarh for 
national benefit. Handholding, capacity building and 
entrepreneurship development by providing training 
with Industry recognized skill-sets leading to better 
employability prospects are the main objective of 
this project.
E-waste lab (Dismantling and segregation) setup at UIET, 
Panjab University Chandigarh
• 
Skills 
development 
training 
program 
for 
Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students 
on E-Waste recycling technologies and testing 
of Restricted Hazardous Substances
	
Under this project, SC/ST students from various 
colleges were provided training on RoHS and 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Innovate and Design in India
Annual
2024-2025
150
E-waste management. In total, 526 SC students 
and 487 ST students were trained for RoHS 
and E-waste dismantling. Conducted RoHS and 
E-waste dismantling awareness programs to 192 
SC students. Trained 334 SC graduate and post 
graduate students of Telangana social welfare 
residential junior colleges and also on PAN India 
basis on E-waste dismantling and RoHS testing at 
C-MET, Hyderabad.
• 
Informal Sector Capacity Building Up gradation 
with Formation of Recycling Clusters and 
Enabling 
Technology 
for 
Recovery 
of 
Resources from Electronic Waste thereby 
Promoting Resource Efficiency and Circular 
Economy
	
The major objective of the project is to upgrade 
the informal sector operators engaged in e– waste 
recycling to enhance capacity building, skill sets 
and assist them with indigenous technologies to 
process e-waste in environmentally sound manner 
and informal sector will be facilitated with MSME 
cluster formation scheme (CFC) to create cluster 
through respective State Government. The idea is 
to generate an interest within the state governments 
and thereby initiating proposals wherein land can 
be provided by the state governments to set-up 
eco-parks which can house the formalized informal 
sector allowing them to dismantle e-waste in a 
scientific manner. Accordingly, technical support 
for setting up eco-parks will be provided so that 
they can access technology and operate the same 
at industrial scale to provide benefits of circular 
economy in extraction of precious metals from 
e-waste and recycling of plastics from e-waste. 
Another objective is to operate the technology 
at industrial scale and facilitate other state 
governments to adopt the same and formalize the 
informal sector in their states thereby securing their 
livelihoods. Through this project, it is envisaged 
that around 15000 persons engaged in e-waste 
management will be trained for scientific methods of 
dismantling, segregation and identification of value 
chain and converting them to micro entrepreneurs. 
The project will be implemented at different states of 
the country through state government supports and 
technical support on various technologies will be 
provided by C-MET Hyderabad, NML Jamshedpur 
and CIPET, Bhuvneshwar.

CHAPTER
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
151
6.1	
Internet Governance Overview
Internet Governance, broadly defined, is the development 
and application by Governments, the private sector 
and civil societies, in their respective roles, of shared 
principles, norms, rules, decision making procedures 
and programmes that shape the evolution and use of 
the internet. It includes development and coordination 
of technical standards, operation of critical infrastructure 
and public policy issues.
Conceptually Internet Governance includes following 
layer
• 
Physical Infrastructure layer
• 
Code or Logical layer
• 
Content layer
• 
Security layer
Internet Governance involves IP addressing, Domain 
Name System (DNS), Routing, Technical Innovations, 
Standardization, Security, Public Policy, Privacy, Legal 
Issues, Cyber Norms, issues pertaining to Intellectual 
Properties and taxation.
6.1.1	 Achievements
Some of the significant achievements of MeitY includes 
representation of India’s Public Policy concerns on global 
platforms, creating awareness on Internet Governance, 
encouraging greater participation in Internet Engineering 
Task Force (IETF) working groups, engagement with 
Internet Society (ISOC), promotion of Multistakeholder 
model of Internet Governance in India etc.
6.1.1.1	 Engagement 
in 
International 
Forums/ 
Meetings
a.	
The Internet Governance Forum (IGF): Serves 
to bring people together from various stakeholder 
groups as equals, in discussions on public policy 
issues relating to the internet. India’s concerns on 
the issues of public policy of the internet and its 
governance are appropriately voiced in meetings of 
the IGF through regular participation, multi-lateral 
and bi-lateral meetings. With the renewal of its 
mandate by United Nations in December 2015, the 
IGF consolidates itself as platform, to bring people 
together from various stakeholders’ groups as 
equals. While there is no negotiated outcome, the 
IGF informs and inspires those with policy making 
power in both the public and private sector at their 
annual meetings, delegates discuss, exchange 
information and share good practices with each 
other. The IGF facilitates a common understanding 
on how to maximize internet opportunities and 
address risks and challenges that may arise.
b.	
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names & 
Numbers (ICANN): MeitY is actively involved 
with the activity of ICANN and participates in 
its proceedings through Government Advisory 
Committee (GAC) and other public engagement 
fora. The GAC’s key role is to advise ICANN 
on issues of public policy and especially where 
there may be an interaction between ICANN’s 
activities or policies and national laws of 
international agreements. Shri Sushil Pal, Joint 
Secretary, Government of India is currently GAC 
representative from India.
c.	
WSIS+20 Forum High Level Event: The WSIS+20 
Forum High-Level Event is convened with the 
objective to take stock of the achievements and 
key trends, challenges and opportunities since 
the Geneva Plan of Action in 2003. The WSIS+20 
Forum High-Level Event 2024 was held at Geneva, 
Switzerland from 27-31 May 2024. A delegation of 
MeitY attended the event in person.
Internet Governance and 
Security of Cyber Space
6

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Internet Governance and Security of Cyber Space
Annual
2024-2025
152
d.	
APNIC: The Asia Pacific Network Information 
Centre (APNIC) serves as the Regional Internet 
Registry (RIR) that allocates and manages IP 
addresses and ASNs in the Asia-Pacific region. 
India actively participates in this event to discuss 
policy matters.
6.1.1.2	 India Internet Governance Forum (IIGF)
IIGF is a multi-stakeholder forum wherein representatives 
from various internet stakeholder groups convene 
together to discuss public policy issues pertaining to the 
Internet. It plays a pivotal role in representing India’s 
interests at the larger International policy and stakeholder 
discussions. This is a national initiative of the United 
Nations IGF. The Fourth edition of IIGF was held from 
9th to 10th December, 2024, with the theme “Innovating 
Internet Governance for India”
6.1.1.3	 Multi-stakeholder consultations
India supports multi-stakeholder model of Internet 
Governance, which would involve all stakeholders and 
helps to preserve the character of the internet as unified, 
dynamic engine for innovation and which encourages 
equity and innovation.
6.1.1.4	 Promotion of Universal Acceptance
MeitY is working towards the implementation of a 
multilingual internet to enable all Indians to connect to and 
use the internet by ensuring that Internet domain names 
in languages other than English (Hindi, Marathi etc.) can 
be issued and used by all Internet enabled applications, 
devices and systems. Hkkjr-(Internationalized Domain 
Name) is now available in 10 scripts covering 22 
scheduled languages of India. With the launch of.Hkkjr, 
end users may book domain names in all scheduled 
Indian languages.
Universal Acceptance (UA) is a global effort to drive a 
more inclusive and multilingual internet. MeitY in support 
from NIXI hosted the regional level event on 2nd Universal 
Acceptance (UA) Day was held on 21st March, 2024, at 
Dr Ambedkar International Centre in the National Capital. 
(Theme: 
BhashaNet: 
Impetus 
Towards 
Universal 
Acceptance). India, which is fast turning into a digital 
economy, has been chosen as the flag bearer to promote 
and promulgate UA for digital inclusion. The event was 
a serious effort to initiate thought-provoking, meaningful 
and result oriented dialogues to raise awareness, break 
the language barriers and make the internet accessible 
to a larger population and bring every citizen in the ambit 
of economic progress.
6.1.1.5	 The research, development and awareness 
agenda under Internet Governance
Various projects have been initiated to have evidence-
based research which will build capacity for India’s 
participation in multiple international fora and also 
strengthening domestic policy related to internet. The 
projects would lead India to become a model Centre and 
provide thought leadership in DNS and DNS security 
related technologies, conducting high-end research in 
DNS Security, building internal competencies in DNS 
Security by offering advanced training programs and 
establish a test-bed of DNS for research and training. The 
outcomes of the projects in IG would enable meaningful 
and sustained engagement in internet governance 
institutions (International) and processes with particular 
focus on the ICANN, IETF etc.
6.1.2	 Projects under Internet Governance Division
A.	
Advanced Internet Operations Research in India 
(AIORI) Phase-II (Building Internet Engineering 
& Standards Ecosystem in India) Funded by 
NIXI: The AIORI project has been a pioneering 
effort in India in field of Internet measurement, DNS 
and resiliency research and has been capable of 
producing a production ready testbed for India and 
the world which is capable of
 
• 
Finding new models and practices of resil-
ient deployments of CII (Critical Internet In-
frastructure).
 
• 
Measuring quality metrics of Internet from 
end users’ perspective.
 
• 
Research on next generation DNS
 
• 
A platform which can be used to code and 
test protocols
 
• 
A testbed for researchers in Internet stand-
ards

Internet Governance and Security of Cyber Space
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
153
 
• 
Work in sync with the world on Internet evo-
lution
	
Under this project, we are focused on creating an 
accurate Geo IP database for India and developing 
tools for last-mile performance measurement and 
troubleshooting for ISPs.
B.	
IG 
SIM-Internet 
Governance 
Structured 
Implementation Module by CDAC, Delhi The 
project envisages to provide technical and policy 
support to conduct Research, Training and 
Workshops and preparation of position paper, 
technology reports etc. on various Internet 
Governance Technology and policy related issues.
	
IG-SIM would take forward the work of reviewing the 
global Internet policy & Technology landscape and 
provide assistance w.r.t. structured implementation 
on matters related to Internet Governance taking 
into account of rapid technical developments and 
dynamically changing needs to provide ongoing 
implementation support to IG related activities of 
the Government of India, Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology (MeitY)
6.2	
National Internet Exchange of India (NIXI)
NIXI is a not-for-profit organization set up under Section 
25 of the Companies Act, 1956 (now section 8 under 
Companies Act, 2013) for peering of ISPs among 
themselves and routing the domestic traffic within the 
country, with seed funding from then Department of IT. 
NIXI is performing the following three activities.
•	
Internet Exchange
•	
.IN Registry and Internationalized Domain Names 
(IDNs)
•	
National Internet Registry (NIR)
Internet Exchange: 77 Internet Exchange Nodes are 
functional across the country. The Internet Exchange 
nodes have been successful in ensuring peering of 
ISPs among themselves for the purpose of routing the 
domestic traffic within the country, instead of taking 
abroad, thereby resulting in better quality of service 
(reduced latency) and reduced bandwidth charges 
for ISPs by saving on International Bandwidth. The 
maximum volume of Internet traffic being handled by 
NIXI at present is 1.53 tbps with 369 members including 
CDN till 31st December, 2024.
Recently NIXI has introduced Bilateral peering along 
with existing Multilateral peering. CDNs are allowed to 
connect at NIXI exchange points free of cost (zero port 
charges). Once CDNs are onboard, more and more ISPs 
shall connect at Exchange points. All functional NIXI 
nodes are IPv6 ready.
.IN Registry and internationalized domain names 
(IDNs): Since 2005, NIXI also manages the .IN Registry 
(www.registry.in). As on December, 2024, 219 Registrars 
have been accredited to offer .IN domain name registration 
worldwide to customers. This has helped proliferation 
of web hosting in the country and promotion of Indian 
language content on the Internet. Over 4.14 million .IN 
domain names have been registered till December ,2024. 
IDN’s in all 22 official languages are launched and over 
0.31 million IDNs domain names have been registered. 
Following schemes are launched to ensure adoption of 
IDN domains and inclusive growth of internet in India: - 
•	
Free IDN (.Hkkjr) to academia
•	
Bundled free email with every .Hkkjr domain
National Internet Registry (NIR): Since March, 2012, 
NIXI is also running the NIR for India named as Indian 
Registry for Internet Names and Numbers (IRINN). IRINN 
is responsible for delegation of IP addresses and AS 
Numbers within the country. Over 4,483 affiliates have 
joined IRINN. NIXI has delegated over 14.73 billion IPv6 
and over 11.21 million IPv4 addresses till December, 
2024. 
NIXI also undertakes training and workshop for Network 
managers and other Technical engineers in co-operation 
with Asia Pacific Network Information Centre (APNIC). 
NIXI has also prepared an audio visual of comparison of 
IPv6 with IPv4 and launched it on various social media 
platforms. NIXI has also hired a training agency for 
providing training on IPv6 fundamentals by way of video 
recordings which gets published on NIXI Academy for 
mass level capacity building.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Internet Governance and Security of Cyber Space
Annual
2024-2025
154
6.3	
Security of Cyber Space
6.3.1 Overview
Cyberspace refers to the virtual computer world and more 
specifically, is an electronic medium used to form a global 
computer network to facilitate online communication 
and dissemination of information. It is a complex 
environment of people, software, hardware and internet. 
Today, cyberspace is the common platform being used 
by citizens, civil society, businesses and Governments 
for messaging, communication and dissemination of 
information online, e-services, e-transaction, etc. As the 
cyberspace is virtual, borderless and offers complete 
anonymity, attacks can be launched from anywhere in 
the world with limited possibility of trace back and positive 
attribution. Emerging technologies such as Internet of 
Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning (ML), Things 
(IoT), 5G, etc, are going to add various connected 
devices in cyberspace in near future. Cyberspace has 
been facing many security challenges due to emerging 
cyber threats and widespread use for social media and 
increasing e-transactions. 
MeitY has taken a number of legal, technical and 
administrative policy measures for addressing cyber 
security challenges. This includes National Cyber 
Security Policy (2013), Guidelines on Information Security 
Practices for Government Entities (2023), enactment of 
Information Technology (IT) Act, 2000 and setting-up of 
Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-
In) for 24×7 cyber incident response under the IT Act, 
2000, Cyber Security R&D and Capacity Building in 
Cyber Security. 
6.3.2	 National Cyber Security Policy (NCSP)
NCSP, 2013 was released for public use in July 2013. 
The policy caters to the cyber security requirements of 
Government and non-Government entities as well as 
large, medium & small enterprises and home users. The 
policy recognises the need for objectives and strategies 
that need to be adopted both at the national level as 
well as international level. The policy aims at facilitating 
creation of secured computing environment and enabling 
adequate trust and confidence in electronic transactions 
and also guiding stakeholders’ actions for protection of 
cyber space. Considering the developments in cyber 
technology, delivery of services through cyber space 
and the changing nature of cyber threats over the years, 
Government of India has formulated the National Cyber 
Security Strategy (NCSS), which will enhance the 
objective and implementation of NCSP, 2013. The NCSS 
is under the process of approval.
6.3.3	 Guidelines on Information Security Practices 
for Government Entities 
Guidelines on Information Security Practices for 
Government Entities have been circulated to all Central 
Ministries/Departments, State/UT Governments and 
government organisations for compliance in order 
to strengthen cyber security. The purpose of these 
guidelines is to establish a prioritized baseline for cyber 
security measures and controls within government 
and their associated organisations. The guidelines 
shall assist security teams to implement baseline and 
essential controls and procedures to protect their cyber 
infrastructure from prominent threats. These guidelines 
shall also act as baseline document for administration 
and audit teams (internal, external/Third-party auditors) 
to evaluate an organisation’s security posture against 
cyber security baseline requirements.
6.3.4	 Cyber Surakshit Bharat (CSB) 
The CSB programme was initiated in partnership with 
industry consortium in Public-Private Partnership (PPP) 
mode with the objective to educate & enable the Chief 
Information Security Officers (CISOs) & broader IT 
community of Central/State Governments, banks and 
PSUs to address the challenges of cyber security. 
The technical content of the training was developed 
after intense discussion with industry consortium and 
knowledge partners. So far, 45 batches of deep dive 
training have been conducted in cities namely, Delhi, 
Gurgaon, Mumbai, Kolkata, Bangalore, Hyderabad, 
Chennai, Chandigarh and Bhopal. A 1662 CISOs/IT 
officials from Government, PSUs, banks and Government 
organisations have been trained till September 2024. 
The Phase-I of CSB has been completed and Phase-II 
is under intiation.

Internet Governance and Security of Cyber Space
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
155
6.3.5	 Grand Challenge for Start-ups
To promote innovation and entrepreneurship spirit in 
the country, the first version of Cyber Security Grand 
Challenge for Start-ups was launched on 15th January 
2020, which was concluded in November 2021. Based 
on the success of Grand Challenge version 1.0, Cyber 
Security Grand Challenge (CSGC) version 2.0 has been 
initiated. 
6.3.6	 	 Public Procurement (Preference to Make in 
India) Order for Cyber Security Products
In furtherance of the Public Procurement (Preference 
to Make in India) Order 2017, notified by Department 
for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) 
(erstwhile Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion 
(DIPP)) vide notification No. P-45021/2/2017-B.E.-
II dated 15.06.2017 and partially modified order 
No. P-45021/2/2017-PP(BE-II) dated 28.05.2018 to 
encourage ‘Make in India’ and to promote manufacturing 
and production of goods and services in India with a view 
to enhancing income and employment, MeitY notified an 
order on 6th December 2019 for promoting indigenous 
Cyber Security products giving details of (a) indicative 
categories of cyber security products and (b) a format for 
self-declaration regarding ‘local supplier’. A revision of 
Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India) Order 
2019 for cyber security products is under process in line 
with the DPIIT order no. P-45021/2/2017-PP(BE-II Part-
IV, Vol. II) dated 19.07.2024. 
6.3.7 	Notification of Forensic Labs as ‘Examiner 
of Electronic Evidence’ under Section 79A of the 
Information Technology Act, 2000
Section 79A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 
mandates the Central Government to notify Examiner 
of Electronic Evidence for the purpose of providing 
expert opinion on electronic form evidence before any 
court or other authority. For identification and selection 
of Examiner of Electronic Evidence, MeitY has designed 
and developed a scheme, initially to access and notify 
Examiner of Electronic Evidence on the pilot basis. 
So far, 16 Cyber Forensics Labs have been notified 
by MeitY which are available at https://www.meity.
gov.in/notification-forensic-labs-‘examiner-electronic-
evidence’-under-section-79a-information-technology.
42th Batch of CISO Deep Dive Training Program on Cyber Security 5-9 Feb 2024  
inaugurated by Additional Secretary, MeitY 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Internet Governance and Security of Cyber Space
Annual
2024-2025
156
6.3.8	 Cyber Security Projects
There has been increasing trends in cyber security 
threats. The newer cyber security threats and risks are 
emerging due to application of emerging technologies 
and there are no technology-specific guidelines to defend 
these threats and challenges. In order to develop best 
practices to defend emerging cyber threats and build 
women capacity in cyber security, Meity has initiated the 
following projects
(i)	
“Development of Best Practices to Counter 
Cyber Security Threats and Challenges arising 
due to Emerging Technologies to deal with 
and prevent cyber security threats arising due 
to Artificial Intelligence, Cloud Computing and 
Internet of Things and create awareness through 
workshops in five different regions (North, South, 
East, West & North-East) among Central and 
State Governments and different Government 
organizations”
(ii)	
CyberShakti: 
Empowering 
Indian 
Women 
Government Officials in Cybersecurity to 
develop the women workforce in cybersecurity. 
The target is to train 1000 women employees 
from various State/UT Governments, Government 
organizations and PSUs through beginner-level 
and advanced-level courses in online and offline 
modes respectively. 
6.4	
R&D initiative under Cyber Security
Research and Development (R&D) in Cyber Security 
focusses on promotion of applied research in addition 
to futuristic and blue-sky research in the thrust areas 
of IoT, Hardware Security, End point security, Network 
and System Security, Cryptography, Cyber Forensics, 
Threat Intelligence etc. Grant-In-Aid support is extended 
to research and academic institutions to promote 
creation of R&D infrastructure, capacity building and 
enhancement of skills and expertise. Specific efforts are 
made to nurture institutions and capacity enhancement 
in the entire country.
This has helped in establishing an ecosystem for cyber 
security startups & industry which resulted in production 
of indigenous state-of-the-art tools for forensics, device 
and end-point security, IoT Security, Threat Intelligence 
tools. Ongoing projects are reviewed periodically and 
follow up actions are taken. Efforts in the projects 
have resulted in the development of certain indigenous 
security solutions and technologies which are deployed 
/ being deployed at various user organisations. In the 
year 2024-25, the significant outcomes of some of the 
on-going projects are given in the following subsections.
6.4.1 
Secure 
Networks 
and 
Edge-Computing 
Hardware for Industry 4.0
This project is being implemented by IIT Delhi. It involves 
two work packages WP1 and WP2. WP1 handles secure 
test-bed development with reactive adversaries, whereas 
WP2 addresses security edge computing solutions for 
industry 4.0 use cases. WP1 comprises Design and 
Development of Communication Protocols against 
Denial-of-Service threats from reactive adversaries. In 
WP1, protocol designs and their performance analyses 
under the generalized energy detectors and development 
of Key-exchange algorithms under reactive adversaries 
have been completed. WP2 comprises development 
of Edge computing apps, secure compressed channel, 
secure enclave on server, Hardware (HW) protection of 
server chip and secure app. 
6.4.2	 Design 
and 
Development 
of 
Advanced 
Forensics Data Analytics Tool 
The project is implemented by a consortium of CDAC 
Trivandrum, CDAC Bangalore and IIT Palakkad, where 
CDAC Trivandrum is the lead implementing agency. 
The other collaborative agencies include Federal Bank, 
Kerala State Forensic Science Lab (KSFSL) and Kerala 
State Electricity Board (KSEB).
Under the MeitY funded project “Design and Development 
of Advanced Forensics Data Analytics Tool”, CDAC 
Trivandrum launched the enhanced versions of the 
Cyber Forensics Tools, CyberCheck - a Forensic Data 
Recovery & Analysis tool, Win-LiFT - Windows Live 
Forensics Tool Suite, Advik CDR Analyzer - A Call 
Data Record/IPDR Analysis Tool, Web Investigator - 
Internet Forensics Tool for Windows Computers, Photo 
Examiner - An Image Forensics Tool, and TrueImager 
- Portable disk imaging hardware solution. These tools 
were officially released by the Secretary, MeitY on 4 

Internet Governance and Security of Cyber Space
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
157
September 2024. The upcoming phase of the project will 
focus on the development of three new tools in the areas 
of FinTech Forensics, IoT Forensics and Forensic Data 
Analytics.
6.4.3	 Cyber Security Technology Development and 
Centre of Excellence
“Cyber Security Technology Development and Centre 
of Excellence” called National Centre of Excellence 
(NCoE) in cyber security, commenced its journey 
on 30th March, 2019 as a joint initiative of MeitY, 
Government of India and Data Security Council of India. 
It was established with an overall objective to establish 
India as a leading cybersecurity hub by accelerating, 
identifying and developing cybersecurity technologies 
in the country, catering to existing market demand, and 
driving future readiness. The NCoE founded on three 
pillars: (i) Entrepreneurial acceleration, (ii) Technology 
development and (iii) Market development of Indian 
cybersecurity ecosystem. So far, NCoE has contributed 
by accelerating 142 startups in various domains of 
cybersecurity like OT Security, IoT security, etc.
6.4.4	 Network Telescope Feed for Threat Intelligence 
Generation
The project aims to advance the development and 
deployment of a Network Telescope, emphasizing 
improved performance and expanded features. Tasks 
include refining the existing prototype with additional 
functionalities, deploying the Network Telescope to collect 
real-time Internet Background Radiations generated 
by malicious activities like scans, worm propagation, 
password cracking attempts and botnet operations.
Development 
of 
tools/APIs 
for 
sharing 
Network 
Telescope data with CERT-In/NCCC will facilitate query-
based extraction of protocol fields, country of origin, 
Autonomous System Numbers, timestamps and Internet 
Service Provider information from the collected data. 
Efforts will focus on enhancing the visibility of the Network 
Telescope by expanding it to cover larger IP blocks.
The project intends to supply data feeds to support 
comprehensive threat intelligence generation and to create 
a repository of Internet Background Radiations for future 
trend analysis. Additionally, research will concentrate 
on Network Telescope-centric Threat Intelligence, 
exploring techniques like TI scoring, analysing malicious 
patterns in packet payloads, detecting singletons within 
other sources of threat intelligence and investigating the 
application of AI and ML techniques for identifying unique 
security patterns and emerging trends.
6.4.5	 Detecting adversarial machine learning 
This project facilitates smart applications such as smart 
homes and smart manufacturing, energy constrained 
devices 
are 
inter-connected 
through 
bandwidth-
constrained communication protocols to form the 
internet-of-things (IoT).
Due to such constraints, an IoT network fails to employ 
conventional security protocols, which makes them 
vulnerable to security threats. One resource-efficient way 
to secure the IoT network is to deploy a comprehensively 
trained machine learning (ML)-based intrusion detection 
system (IDS). However, the existing IDSs are vulnerable 
to adversarial machine learning (AML)-assisted attacks 
that occur during the inference phase of the ML model, 
i.e. when the IDS employs the ML model for analysing 
specific network traffic to determine the presence/
absence of a malicious attack. In an AML-assisted attack, 
the attacker makes carefully crafted perturbations in the 
network packets with the goal to evade detection by the 
IDS. In this project, our objective is to resolve this issue 
by developing an AML-resilient IDS for detecting AML-
assisted attacks in IoT networks. We also plan to set up 
an IoT testbed and conduct extensive experiments to 
evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed IDS.
6.4.6	 Malware and Malware-based attack Detection 
Using Statistical and Machine Learning Approach
This project aims to counter the escalating threat posed 
by malware and malware-based attacks on the Internet 
and its services, extending beyond traditional devices 
to include IoT networks and critical infrastructures. The 
focus is on leveraging machine learning for defence 
solutions. The project is organized into seven modules: 
(i) establishing test-beds for experimental analysis and 
visualization of malware, (ii) generating benchmark 
malware datasets for Android and Windows platforms, 
(iii) defending against known malware using supervised 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Internet Governance and Security of Cyber Space
Annual
2024-2025
158
learning, (iv) integrating malware defence by combining 
grey level and feature data, (v) enhancing the prototype 
with early responses for unknown malware on CPU-
GPU platforms, (vi) detecting malware-based attacks on 
critical infrastructure and (vii) supporting the prototype 
with a dynamic signature-based mitigation technique for 
fast and accurate detection of both known and unknown 
malware.
The overall goal is to address the evolving nature of cyber 
threats by developing dynamic defence mechanisms 
through machine learning techniques.
6.4.7	 Centre on Hardware Security: Hardware-
Security Entrepreneurship Research & Development 
(HERD)
The 
project 
aims 
to 
promote 
research 
and 
entrepreneurship in hardware security. The project is 
implemented by a consortia of leading hardware security 
institution IIT Kharagpur, IIT Madras and Data Security 
Council of India, which is creating a national ecosystem 
for cyber security research and entrepreneurship 
through National CoE. The goal is to make India the 
leading nation in hardware security, both in research and 
entrepreneurship. The objectives are:
(i)	
Promotion of Hardware Security Research: Set 
up a well-devised research agenda in hardware 
security focussing on contemporary and emerging 
challenges. Promote hardware security research 
and ensure concerted efforts for measured and 
visible progress in the research work. 
(ii)	
Productization 
and 
Commercialisation 
of 
Research IPs: Create market-ready IPs in 
hardware security, focussing on productization 
and commercialisation. Run a focussed incubation 
and acceleration program for start-up activities in 
hardware security. Develop market and investment 
ecosystem industry adoption and innovation 
growth. 
(iii)	
Pool 
of 
Hardware 
Security 
Researchers: 
Develop a pool of resources for hardware security 
research and product development. Attract minds 
of engineering students challenges of hardware 
security. 
(iv)	
Support to Hardware System Assurance 
Efforts: Develop formal methods, tools, and 
utilities assessing the security and trustworthiness 
of hardware/cyber systems. Support hardware and 
embedded assurance efforts with them. 
(v)	
Methods and utilities for Supply Chain Security: 
Close observations on the hardware components, 
their role in the supply chains, investigate them for 
security threats, devise utilities for helping assess 
their security, and evolve methods for managing 
the risks emanating from them.
(vi)	
Sectoral Hardware Security: Examine hardware 
and embedded systems deployed in the industry 
verticals and undertake experimental evaluation/ 
assessment exercises. Develop test cases for 
testing, carry vulnerability research, and help in 
devising hardening guidelines.
(vii)	 Enterprise Systems for Managing Hardware 
Security Risks: Explore ways, methods, and 
techniques for enterprise systems to manage 
hardware-level threats on a real-time and continual 
basis.
 
6.4.8	 Efforts / activities in North Eastern (NE) States
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY), Govt. of India has taken initiative as per NE 
Vision 2022, with the broad vision of providing cyber-
crime investigation skills effectively. Major projects in NE 
states include:
1.	
Initiative for Cyber Security Aware Society in 
NE States- Cross Platform Mobile Application 
developed to initiate cyber security aware society.

Internet Governance and Security of Cyber Space
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
159
 
 
	
The prime objectives of the project are to raise 
overall awareness about risks in cyber space 
targeting different sections of society by designing 
and conducting audience specific campaigns to 
create impact, so that people before connecting to 
online world, understand the risk and vulnerabilities 
in cyber space; and would be in a position to promote 
the use of cyber security resources and tools for 
carrying out a number of awareness programs 
with the aim to encourage participation in cyber 
security focused activities in each district of the 
three states, viz. Nagaland, Mizoram and Sikkim, 
and the development of “Cybersmart Citizen” 
and “Stay Smart online” campaigns catering to 
different sections of the society. The targeted 
segments would include general public (SHGs 
(self-help groups)/ NGOs/ CSCs (common service 
centers)/ VLEs (village level entrepreneurs)/ ASHA 
workers etc.), students, undergraduate student, 
young professionals, including elderly citizens, 
government employees and SMEs. 
2.	
Development of Cyber Forensic Training cum 
Investigation Labs in North-Eastern States and 
Cloud based Centralized Cyber Forensics Lab 
Infrastructure.
The prime objective of the project is to:
(i)	
Setup Cyber Forensics Training cum Investigation 
Labs in 8 NIELIT Centre of 8 North Eastern states, 
(ii)	
Capacity building of various stakeholders of criminal 
justice system like Police officers, Prosecutors, 
Judges, Investigation Officers of all LEAs etc. in 
each of the 8 NE states,
(iii)	
Develop resource portal with Dashboard along 
with e-learning methodologies over cloud, and 
creation of MIS based facility for courseware 
dissemination, information exchange, resource 
persons/ organizations for sharing of expertise 
among the eight NE states
 
 
Glimpses of Cyber Forensic Labs created  
at the NIELIT Centre’s
6.4.9	 New projects initiated
During the year 2024-25, the following R&D project has 
been initiated. 
6.4.9.1	 A Comprehensive IoT Security Ecosystem 
and Sandbox
This project is jointly implemented by consortia of 10 
research and academic institutions: (1) C-DAC Bangalore, 
(2) C-DAC Hyderabad, (3) C-DAC Thiruvananthapuram, 
(4) C-DAC Chennai, (5) SETS Chennai, (6) ERNET 
Chennai, (7) IIT Madras (8) IIT Bombay (9) IIIT Bangalore 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Internet Governance and Security of Cyber Space
Annual
2024-2025
160
and (10) Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham Kollam. The 
objective is to develop components and solutions for 
enabling a secure IoT ecosystem layered with Edge 
Intelligence and also establishing a sandbox for validating 
the functional and security features of IoT devices. The 
expected outcomes of this project can be classified into 
four categories viz., (i) IoT Device Security Solutions, 
(ii) IoT Network Security Solutions, (iii) IoT Functional 
Sandbox and (iv) IoT Security Sandbox. The sandbox 
facility for validating the functionality and security of IoT will 
evaluate interoperability, scalability and other protocol-
specific testing towards validating the functionality of 
the device. IoT device security will be validated at each 
layer namely physical, firmware and application. The 
baseline architecture for the IoT functionality and security 
sandbox has been designed with diverse protocols. The 
project also envisages development of security solution 
for IoT devices as well as for networks through the 
implementation of Zero Trust architecture with SDN, 
secures device provisioning, lightweight cryptographic 
algorithms, secure bootstrapping, identity management 
system for IoT devices, and traffic monitoring with 
anomaly detection. The sandbox facility will be made 
up of indigenous hardware and software components in 
an isolated environment. This facility shall be accessible 
via web portal also, where the client can select from a 
variety of functionality and security tests to evaluate on 
IoT devices. 
6.5	
Indian Computer Emergency Response Team 
(CERT-In)
The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team 
(CERT-In) is a government organisation under Ministry 
of Electronics and Information Technology, Government 
of India. CERT-In has been designated under Section 
70B of the Information Technology Act, 2000 to serve as 
the national agency to perform the following functions in 
the area of cyber security:
a)	
Collection, 
analysis 
and 
dissemination 
of 
information on cyber security incidents
b)	
Forecast and alerts of cyber security incidents
c)	
Emergency measures for handling cyber security 
incidents
d)	
Coordination of cyber security incident response 
activities
e)	
Issue guidelines, advisories, vulnerability notes 
and white papers relating to information security 
practices, procedures, prevention, response and 
reporting of cyber incidents
f)	
Such other functions relating to cyber security as 
may be prescribed.
CERT-In creates awareness on cyber security issues 
through dissemination of information on its websites 
(https://www.cert-in.org.in and https://www.csk.gov.in) 
and operates 24x7 incident response Help Desk. CERT-
In provides Incident Prevention and Response services 
as well as Security Quality Management Services. 
The activities carried out by CERT-In during January 
2024 to December 2024 comprised of the following:
Activities
Numbers (January 2024 
to December 2024)
Incidents handled
2041360
Security Alerts
959
Advisories
72
Vulnerability Notes
360
Trainings
23
International cyber 
security drills/exercises
05
Domestic Cyber security 
drills/exercises
18
6.5.1 Cyber Security Assurance
Under Security Assurance Framework, Indian Computer 
Emergency Response Team  (CERT-In) has created a 
panel of ‘IT security auditing organizations’ for auditing, 
including vulnerability assessment and penetration 
testing of computer systems, networks & applications 
of various organizations of the Government, critical 
infrastructure organizations and those in other sectors 
of Indian economy. CERT-In has empaneled  160 
Information Security Auditing organizations, on the basis 
of stringent qualifying criteria, to carry out information 

Internet Governance and Security of Cyber Space
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
161
security audit, including the vulnerability assessment 
and penetration test of the networked infrastructure of 
government and critical sector organizations. CERT-In 
also completed technical skills re-verification of already 
empanelled auditing organizations.
6.5.2 Cyber Crisis Management Plan
CERT-In has formulated Cyber Crisis Management Plan 
(CCMP) for countering cyber-attacks and cyber terrorism 
for implementation by all Ministries/Departments of 
Central Government, State Governments/UTs and 
organizations under their administrative control. Along 
with the CCMP, CERT-In has developed “Guidance 
Framework for CCMP “which may be used as a template 
by various entities including Central Government 
Ministries/Departments/States/UTs and entities under 
their administrative control to prepare & implement 
their own CCMP. CCMP outlines a framework for 
dealing with cyber related incidents for a coordinated, 
multi-disciplinary and broad-based approach for rapid 
identification, information exchange, swift response and 
remedial actions to mitigate and recover from malicious 
cyber incidents. CERT-In has conducted 35 workshops 
from January 2024 to December 2024 to appraise various 
organizations under the Central Ministries/States/UTs 
about the implementation of CCMP and cybersecurity 
best practices and all necessary assistance is being 
provided to them for implementation of CCMP.
6.5.3	 Cyber Security Exercises
Cybersecurity exercise is an effective tool to help entities 
in assessing cybersecurity preparedness to counter 
cyber-threats and building cyber-resiliency. CERT-In 
regularly conduct Cyber Security Exercises for critical 
sector organizations.
a)	
Table Top Exercises & Cyber Security Drills
	
Till date, CERT-In has conducted 108 Cybersecurity 
exercises of different complexities, including 
table-top exercises, with participation from about 
1435 organizations covering various sectors of 
Indian economy from Government/Public/Private 
i.e. Defence, Paramilitary forces, Space, Atomic 
Energy, Telecommunications (ISPs), Finance, 
Power, Oil & Natural Gas, Transportation (Railways 
& Civil Aviation), IT/ ITeS/ BPO sectors and State 
Data Centres. During January- December 2024, 
CERT-in has conducted the following Table Top 
Exercises (TTX).
	
(i)	
Table Top Exercise (TTX) for Multi Com-
modity Exchange (MCX) on 19th March and 
21st October 2024, respectively. 
	
(ii)	
03 Cyber Security Operational & Strategic 
Table Top Exercises (TTX) for Securities 
and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) on 18th 
March, 27th September and 23rd December 
2024. 
	
(iii)	
A cybersecurity Table Top Exercise for 
Tehri Hydro Development Corporation Ltd 
(THDC) held on 12th December 2024. The 
exercise was based on cyber resilience for 
Operational Technology (OT), Industrial 
Control Systems (ICS), Supervisory Control 
and Data Acquisition (SCADA) technologies 
used in industrial operations
	
(iv)	
01 Table Top Exercise (TTX) for National 
Investigation Agency (NIA) on 23rd August 
2024. The theme of the exercise was “Coun-
ter Cyber Terrorism”. 
	
(v)	
A 10-day long Cybersecurity Drill “Cyber 
Shock-3” for Banks, Insurance Companies, 
SEBI 
Regulated 
Entities, 
Hydro-Power 
Organisations, 
Thermal-Power 
Utilities, 
Transmission & Distribution units, Grid 
Operation, and Renewal Energy Entities. 
More than 400 organisations and over 
1400 officials participated in the hands-on 
“Cyber Shock-3” from 27th May-7th June, 
2024 to improve their cybersecurity posture 
by building Cyber Resilience to counter 
Ransomware & Cyber Extortion Attacks.
b)	
International Cyber Security Exercises
	
(i)	
CERT-In contributed and participated in the 
APCERT Annual Cyber Drill 2024 held on 
29th August 2024. The objective of the drill 
was to test the response capability of lead-
ing Computer Security Incident Response 
Teams (CSIRT) within the Asia Pacific 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Internet Governance and Security of Cyber Space
Annual
2024-2025
162
economies. The theme of this drill was “APT 
Group Attack Response: Where is Wally”. 
 
(ii) 
CERT-In participated in the first BRICS 
Cyber Drill held in Kazan, Russia held from 
16th to 19th September 2024. The theme of the 
drill was “Attacks on Suppliers (SupChain)”. 
The primary agenda of the drill was to 
enhance communication, coordination and 
threat intelligence sharing among member 
countries 
and 
improving 
cybersecurity 
resilience. 
	
(iii)	
CERT-In participated in the ACID Drill & TTX 
held on 15th & 16th October 2024. The theme 
of the drill was “Navigating the Rise of AI-
Enabled Cyber Attacks”. The primary objec-
tive of this drill was to test incident response 
processes, best practices to identify areas 
for further improvement and enhance opera-
tions planning capabilities.
	
(iv)	
CERT-In participated in the 4th edition of 
AFRICA CERT Cyber Drill held on 29th No-
vember 2024. The theme of the drill was 
“Enhance Your Readiness (Technical Exer-
cise)” The drill included various threat simu-
lations, including ransomware attacks, re-
verse engineering of malware, and strategic 
scenarios tailored to represent current cyber 
risks. 
6.5.4	 International Cooperation and Collaboration
a)	
Memorandum 
of 
Understanding 
(MoU)/
Memorandum of Cooperation (MoC) 
	
Strengthening cooperation with all stakeholders 
to effectively deal with cyber security issues 
has been one of the main focus areas of the 
Government. This aspect is being dealt with by 
way of security cooperation arrangements in the 
form of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)/
Memorandum of Cooperation (MoC)/Program 
of Cooperation (PoC) between Indian Computer 
Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) and its 
overseas counterpart agencies that are willing to 
work together and share information in a timely 
manner for preventing cyber-attacks as well as 
collaborating for providing swift response to cyber 
security incidents. 
	
Currently, 
the 
Indian 
Computer 
Emergency 
Response Team (CERT-In) has 8 active Bilateral 
agreements in the form of MoU/MoC/PoC in the 
area of cyber security with counterpart agencies 
in Bangladesh, Egypt, Estonia, Japan, Maldives, 
Russian Federation, UK, and Vietnam. 
	
CERT-In is regularly coordinating with leading 
service providers and product vendors within and 
outside the country to obtain advance information 
on latest cyber threats and attack trends and devise 
appropriate proactive and preventive measures. 
To deal with the complex, sophisticated cyber-
attacks, CERT-In partners with cyber security 
organizations from industry for collaboration in the 
area of cyber security with CISCO India, CloudSEK, 
Fortinet Inc, Google India, Quick Heal, Information 
Sharing and Analysis Centre (ISAC), Mastercard 
India Services Private Limited, Microsoft, Micro 
World Technologies (eScan), National Institute of 
Electronics & Information Technology (NIELIT), 
K7 Computing, Kaspersky, Skills DA and Redinent 
Innovations.
b)	
CERT-In in Multilateral forums 
 
• 
CERT-In is an Operational Member of Asia 
Pacific Computer Emergency Response 
Teams (APCERT). APCERT is a regional 
forum to ensure Internet security in Asia Pa-
cific region.
 
• 
CERT-In is a full member of Forum of In-
cident Response and Security Teams 
(FIRST). FIRST is a global forum for cyber 
security teams around the globe.
 
• 
CERT-In is Accredited Member of Task 
Force for Computer Security Incident Re-
sponse Teams / Trusted Introducer (TF-
CSIRT/TI) from 13th September 2022. TI-
CSIRT was established by the European 
CERT community in 2000 to address com-
mon needs and build a service infrastructure 
providing vital support for all security and 
incident response teams.

Internet Governance and Security of Cyber Space
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
163
 
• 
CERT-In is an associate partner in Charter 
of Trust (CoT) global forum. The Associated 
Partner Forum (APF) of CoT brings together 
regulators, research institutes, universities, 
and think tanks with the CoT’s industry part-
ners to build a trusted network committed 
to creating a strong digital security environ-
ment across the global economy.
 
• 
CERT-In leverages these forums for timely 
resolution of cross-border related Cyber se-
curity incidents affecting Indian cyber space.
c)	
Working Groups
	
CERT-In is the convener of “IoT Security working 
group” across APCERT. Two reports of the “IoT 
Security” working groups has been circulated to 
the APCERT operational members. 
	
CERT-In is also member of various other working 
groups under APCERT such as Information sharing 
working group, Drill working group, Malware 
Mitigation working group, Tsubame working group 
and Training Working Group.
6.5.5	 CVE Numbering Authority (CNA)
CERT-In has been undertaking responsible vulnerability 
disclosure and coordination for vulnerabilities reported 
to CERT-In since its inception. To move a step towards 
strengthening the trust in “Make in India” as well as to 
nurture responsible vulnerability research in the country, 
CERT-In has partnered with the CVE Program, MITRE 
Corporation, USA. In this regard, CERT-In has been 
authorized by the CVE Program, as a CVE Numbering 
Authority (CNA) for vulnerabilities impacting all products 
designed, developed and manufactured in India since 
October 2021.
CNAs are organizations responsible for the regular 
assignment of CVE IDs to vulnerabilities, and for creating 
and publishing information about the vulnerability in the 
associated CVE Records within their own specific scopes 
of coverage. Till December 2024, 80 CVE IDs have been 
assigned and published by CERT-In.
6.5.6	 Sectoral CERTs and State CSIRTs
Under Sub-section (IV), clause (e) of the National Cyber 
Security Policy, 2013 proposed to create mechanisms for 
Security threat early warning, vulnerability management 
and response to security threats, CERT-In functions 
as the umbrella organization in enabling creation and 
operationalization of Sectoral and State Computer 
Security Incident Response Teams (CSIRTs) as well as 
facilitating communication and coordination actions in 
dealing with cyber crisis situations. CERT-In is issuing 
the necessary guidelines for setting up of sectoral 
CSIRTs and state CSIRTs. 
CERT-In is sending out fortnightly reports on vulnerable 
services and botnet infections through its Cyber 
Swachhta Kendra (Botnet Cleaning and Malware 
Analysis Centre) to sectoral CSIRTs, Ministry of Power 
and other stakeholders in Power sector.
CSIRT-Power facility has been operationalized and 
notified on 23 September 2024 to serve as the responsible 
agency for responding to and preventing cybersecurity 
incidents within the power sector in coordination with 
CERT-In.
6.5.7	 CSIRT-Fin
CSIRT-Fin under CERT-In has been assigned the 
responsibility for coordinating and supporting the 
response to a computer security event or incident 
within the financial sector constituency. CSIRT-Fin is 
the incident response force which focuses on mitigation 
processes, providing on-site awareness, expertise, and 
recovery oversight. 
The snapshot of activities performed by CSIRT-Fin this 
year, is as follows:
• 
Handling of security incidents in collaboration with 
CERT-In which included security incidents related 
to vulnerable services, botnets, open services and 
phishing incidents. Entities have also been on 
boarded to CERT-In’s Cyber Swachhta Kendra 
(CSK) for providing automated feeds regarding 
malware 
infections, 
botnets 
and 
vulnerable 
services
• 
Issuing of vulnerability notes and virus alerts along 
with CERT-In.
• 
Tailored threat intelligence alerts for proactive 
measures were sent to financial sector constituency 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Internet Governance and Security of Cyber Space
Annual
2024-2025
164
and entities have been on boarded on CERT-In’s 
automated threat intelligence platform.
6.5.8	 Cyber Swachhta Kendra (Botnet Cleaning and 
Malware Analysis Centre)
• 
Cyber Swachhta Kendra (CSK) - The Botnet 
Cleaning and Malware Analysis Centre has been 
setup to create a secure cyber space by detecting 
botnet infections in India and to notify, enable 
cleaning and securing systems of end users to 
prevent further infections. CSK is covering about 
94% of Indian internet users as well as 1371 
organizations across sectors. The Centre is working 
with Energy, Finance, Healthcare, Infrastructure, 
Transport, “Industries and Manufacturing”, “IT & 
ITeS”, Government, Agriculture and Academia 
Sector organizations to detect malware infections 
in their networks and enable remedial actions. More 
than 400 organizations have been added in last 6 
months (July-December 2024) to get benefited by 
the services provided by CSK.
• 
Cyber Swachhta Kendra aims to secure India’s 
digital IT Infrastructure by creating a dedicated 
mechanism for providing timely information about 
Botnet/Malware threats to the victim organization/
user and suggesting remedial actions to be taken 
by the concerned entity. 
• 
CSK is playing a very proactive and pivotal role in 
a continuously evolving cybersecurity environment 
through identifying new botnet/malware, under-
standing their threat level and subsequent Informa-
tion dissemination to organizations with suggestive 
remedial actions.
• 
In order to reach out larger audiences in the country, 
the website of Cyber Swachhta Kendra is available 
in Hindi language and a new domain “www.
lh,lds-ljdkj-Hkkjr” was created. Hindi website of 
CSK received positive response and became very 
popular among citizens. CSK also started notifying 
end users about botnet/malware infection in their 
digital devices via Internet Service Providers (ISP) 
in Hindi as well as English language. This activity 
was also appreciated by users.
• 
During the period January- December 2024, 
over 570 botnet/malware family were tracked 
and reported to collaborating ISPs/organizations. 
The type of Malware/Botnet infections include 
Trojans, IoT bots, Ransomware, Crypto currency 
miners, POS Malware, Worm, Botnets, Adware, 
Exploit kit etc. Moreover, systems with vulnerable 
services that could be exploited to carry out cyber-
attacks were also reported to various critical sector 
organizations. The vulnerabilities could also have 
severe impact such as information disclosure, 
launch DDoS attacks, unauthorized access etc. 
CSK suggests about solutions/ patching of the 
vulnerabilities.
• 
Besides the core activity mentioned above, 
CSK also participated in various cyber security 
events/awareness programs in collaboration with 
Government agencies/ Academia/ ISP etc. to 
create cyber security awareness & hygiene among 
the users/ organizations in the country.
• 
During 01-15 February 2024, CSK celebrated 
“Cyber Swacchta Pakhwada” to create cyber 
security awareness among internet users across 
the country. CSK coordinated with ISPs, Anti-Virus 
companies to reach out and inform end users of 
internet about malware attacks, implications and 
safe guard their interest in cyber space. Around 
3.19 lakh Free Bot Removal Tool downloads were 
observed during this period (01-15 February 2024).
• 
CSK also published cyber security awareness 
information during “Cyber Jaagrookta Diwas 
(CJD)” on its website as and when it is celebrated 
(First Wednesday of every month) so that the 
useful information about cyber security awareness 
may reach to citizens.
• 
CSK is committed to enable users getting their 
digital devices secure against any cyber infection. 
CSK also strives to collaborate with Indian 
entities/ cyber security companies to come up 
with good security solutions/ AVs. CSK currently 
has collaboration with three Free Bot Removal 
Tools (FBRTs) namely Escan, K7 and QuickHeal 
to citizens through its portal/website. CSK is now 
providing FBRT for Windows as well as for Android 
platform. The overall count of number of downloads 

Internet Governance and Security of Cyber Space
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
165
of all the FBRT (total 3 in numbers) till December 
2024 stands at over 69.83 lakh. 
• 
The FBRTs are regularly updated with latest 
malware signature of recent botnet/ malware so 
that citizens can be safe against evolving cyber 
malware.
• 
For the future endeavor of CSK, it is planned to 
reach out to more sectors for outreach of CSK 
so that more organizations may benefit from 
CSK services. CSK envisages coordination and 
collaboration with entities working in the field 
of cyber security (such as Antivirus companies, 
Academia, Govt. agencies or Private Players etc.) 
for the welfare of ICT users in the country, enable 
users/organizations to keep their network secure 
against cyber infections.
6.5.9 Cyber Forensics Lab
Cyber Forensics Laboratory of CERT-In is a notified Lab 
under the scheme of Examiner of Electronic Evidence in 
exercise of the powers conferred under section 79A of 
the Information Technology (IT) Act, 2000 in Computer 
Forensics and Mobile Device Forensics as its scope. 
Cyber Forensics Lab of CERT-In is equipped with 
the state-of-the-art equipment and tools to carry out 
data retrieval, processing and analysis of the raw 
data extracted from the digital data storage, mobile 
devices, cloud service providers, Internet of Things (IoT) 
devices, Drones, Digital Video Recorders (DVRs) and 
Network Video Recorders (NVRs) using sound digital 
forensic techniques. The Lab also has the capabilities 
of unlocking/bypassing complex passwords of high-end 
devices and extracting data from hidden folders.
The primary task of the Cyber Forensics Lab is to 
assist the Incident Response (IR) team of CERT-In on 
occurrence of a cyber-incident and extend digital forensic 
support to carry out further investigation. In addition, the 
Cyber Forensics Lab assists different Law Enforcement 
Agencies (LEAs), Intelligence Agencies and State Police 
departments in digital forensic data retrieval and analysis 
which is being extensively used in investigation of the 
cases of terrorism, anti-national activities, narcotics, 
trafficking etc, that involves unlocking and bypassing 
of security features of high-end digital exhibits in a 
forensically sound manner such that the report can be 
presented in the Court of Law. In 2024, the Lab has 
worked on 56+ cases which are related to National 
importance and provided vital inputs to various agencies 
thereby helping the agencies to nab the perpetrators by 
understanding the different contours of crime. 
6.5.10 CERT-In Threat Intelligence eXchange - 
Proactive Threat Intelligence Sharing Platform
CERT-In established its automated Cyber Threat 
Intelligence Sharing Platform [CTIS] in 2018 for facilitating 
bidirectional sharing of operational, strategic, enriched 
tactical threat intelligence to various counterparts and 
stakeholders. This initiative is helping Indian stakeholders 
to enhance the effectiveness of security and IT teams 
in reducing exposure by attempt to uncover unknown 
threats and informing better, faster decisions. The 
platform collects, correlates, enriches, contextualizes, 
analyses, integrates, tags with Traffic Light Protocol 
(TLP) and pushes to the partners in near real time. 
The shared data can be consumed by the recipients 
into their automated workflows so as to streamline the 
threat detection, management, analysis, and defensive 
process and track it through to completion by leveraging 
its powerful API integrations with supporting SIEMs, 
firewalls, and other endpoint protection solutions. 
CERT-In envisages that implementing threat intelligence 
profoundly elevates Government/Critical organization’s 
security posture, enabling the respective security team 
to understand and effectively predict the cyber threats 
that imperil their organization’s key assets. Empowering 
organizations to anticipate who may attack next, and how, 
allows security teams to focus on prioritizing resources 
so they can respond effectively to future cyber-attacks.
6.5.11 Security awareness, skill development and 
training
As part of its mandate, CERT-In is regularly carrying 
out various activities for development of cyber security 
capacities, 
skill 
building, 
awareness 
and 
citizen 
sensitization with respect to cyber-attacks and cyber 
frauds. In order to create security awareness within the 
Government, Public and Private Sector organizations, 
CERT-In regularly conducts trainings / workshops to 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Internet Governance and Security of Cyber Space
Annual
2024-2025
166
train officials of Government, Public and Private sector 
organizations across all sectors and citizens on focused 
topics of Cyber Security.
The training/workshop programs focus on technical 
topics with technology presentations & demonstration/
Hands-on sessions for technical cyber community. 
During the period of January 2024 to December 
2024, CERT-In has conducted 15 trainings on various 
specialized topics of cyber security. About 12,014 Officers 
including system/Network Administrators, Database 
Administrators, Application developers, IT Managers, 
Chief Information Security Officers (CISOs)/ Chief 
information officers (CIOs), and IT Security professional 
have been trained. 
CERT-In is carrying out various activities and campaign 
for creating cyber security awareness and sensitizing 
internet users for safeguarding from various cyber threats, 
frauds and crimes. CERT-In is observing Cyber Security 
Awareness Month during October of every year, Safer 
Internet Day on 1st Week Tuesday of February Month 
every year, Swachhta Pakhwada from 1 to 15 February 
of every year and Cyber Jagrookta Diwas (CJD) on 1st 
Wednesday of every month by organising various events 
and activities for citizens as well as the technical cyber 
community in India. CERT-In officials provide Cyber 
security and Cybercrime frauds awareness sessions 
to 
different 
Ministries, 
Government 
Departments, 
Educational institutions and Industry across the country.
During October Month (NCSAM 2024), CERT-In 
conducted 69 awareness sessions for different sectors 
in collaboration with different organizations covering 
18,472 participants. In 2024, CERT-In has conducted 
95 awareness sessions covering 23,724 participants 
(including NCSAM 2024).
CERT-In conducted various cyber security awareness 
activities during National Cyber Security Awareness 
Month (NCSAM),  October 2024  with the theme 
“SatarkNagrik, Secure our World”.  CERT-In conducted 
several awareness activities such as Quiz, webinars, 
Capture the Flag event in collaboration with ISEA, 
C-DAC, Noida and other industrial partners. Total 
outreach during the NCSAM 2024 is 2,91,51,056
CERT-In released a Cyber security Awareness Booklet 
for Digital Nagriks and Digital Enterprises during the 
National Cyber security Awareness Month 2024 to 
create more awareness on the cyber-attacks and cyber 
frauds with information on best practices and reporting 
mechanisms. The booklet is available online at https://
www.cert-in.org.in/PDF/CSH_Booklet.pdf

Internet Governance and Security of Cyber Space
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
167
CERT-In released Internet Safety Awareness Booklet for 
Digital Nagriks and Digital Enterprises during the Safer 
Internet Day on 06th February 2024 to educate the users 
on the best practices that needs to be followed for using 
the internet in a safe and secure manner. The booklet is 
available online at https://www.cert-in.org.in /PDF/ISA_
Booklet.pdf. 
CERT-In carried out various cyber security awareness 
campaigns in the form of hosting cyber security quiz 
in collaboration with ISEA and awareness sessions on 
cyber hygiene to Government Ministries, Departments, 
PSUs, Private sector organizations, Academia and 
Research organizations in collaboration with its partners. 
CERT-In is regularly sharing safety and security tips and 
awareness posters, info-graphics and videos through 
its official websites and social media handles such as 
Facebook, X (Twitter), Instagram LinkedIn and YouTube 
for sensitising internet users on cyber frauds and Cyber 
Security best practices.
Key training programs conducted for various sectors 
and organizations
• 
CERT-In in collaboration with Google successfully 
conducted a workshop on Cyber Crisis Management 
Plan (CCMP) on 12th March 2024 at Delhi for 
various Government Departments including Power 
& Energy sector. 
• 
CERT-In in collaboration with Google India Pvt. 
Ltd. Successfully conducted two–day Training 
programme a “Joint Cyber Security Training 
Program” for Senior and Mid-level officers of 
Government 
Ministries/Departments, 
Central 
Government Organizations and Public Sector Units 
(PSUs) on 27th and 28th June 2024 at the Google 
India Private Limited office, Bangalore.
• 
CERT-In and GCA (Global Cyber security 
Association) jointly conducted a workshop on 
“Cybersecurity Governance and Risk Assessment 
& Management” for senior officials from various 
Government departments and PSUs on 21st March 
2024 at CERT-In office, Shastri Park, New Delhi. 
• 
CERT-In conducted a workshop on Cyber Crisis 
Management Plan (CCMP) on 30th July 2024 at IIT-
Kanpur and also provided insights on regulatory 
guidelines targeting the port sector.
• 
CERT-In conducted Two–day Training programme 
on Cyber security preparedness for Cyber security 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Internet Governance and Security of Cyber Space
Annual
2024-2025
168
preparedness for Health Sector on 25th and 26th 
July 2024.
• 
CERT-In conducted Two–day Training programme 
on Cyber security preparedness for West Bengal 
Computer Security Incident Response Team (WB-
CSIRT) on 25th and 26th September 2024.
• 
CERT-In conducted Two–day Training programme 
on Cyber security preparedness for Power CSIRT 
on 08th and 09th October 2024
6.5.12	 National Cyber Coordination Centre (NCCC)
CERT-In has operationalised the National Cyber 
Coordination Centre (NCCC) project with the objective to 
generate situational awareness of existing and potential 
cyber security threats and enable timely information 
sharing for proactive, preventive, and protective actions 
by individual entities. NCCC aims to create a structured 
system to facilitate coordination effort among stakeholders 
by sharing with them inputs in terms of information about 
threats/attacks and possible extent which in turn enables 
immediate remedial actions by the stakeholders. 
The project is facilitating various organizations and 
entities as well as major events in the country to mitigate 
cyber-attacks and cyber incidents on a near real-time 
basis. 
6.5.13	 CERT-In 
Initiatives 
towards 
Security 
including Digital Payments
• 
CSIRT-Fin under CERT-In has been assigned the 
responsibility for coordinating and supporting the 
response to a computer security event or incident 
within the financial sector constituency. CSIRT-Fin 
is the incident response force which focuses on 
mitigation processes, providing on-site awareness, 
expertise, and recovery oversight.
• 
959 Alerts, 72 Advisories and 360 vulnerability 
notes have been issued by CERT-In to enable 
organizations and users to secure their systems 
and data during January- December, 2024.
• 
CERT-In 
has 
empanelled 
160 
Information 
Security Auditing organizations to carry out 
technical information security audit, including the 
vulnerability assessment and penetration testing of 
ICT infrastructure of government and critical sector 
organizations.
• 
Cybersecurity exercise is an effective tool to help 
entities in assessing cybersecurity preparedness 
to counter cyber-threats and building cyber-
resiliency. CERT-In regularly conduct Cyber 
Security Exercises for critical sector organizations. 
Till date CERT-In has conducted 99 Cyber security 
exercises of different complexities, including 
table-top exercises, with participation from about 
1260 organizations covering various sectors of 
Indian economy from Government/Public/ Private 
i.e. Defence, Paramilitary forces, Space, Atomic 
Energy, telecommunications (ISPs), Finance, 
Power, Oil & Natural Gas, Transportation (Railways 
& Civil Aviation), IT/ IT-eS/ BPO sectors and State 
Data Centres. 
• 
CERT-In along with RBI (College of Agriculture 
Banking) conducted a technical cybersecurity 
exercise on Incident Response and Analysis on 
03rd September 2024, participants from 27 banks 
joined in the exercise.
• 
CERT-In conducted Operational as well as 
Technical cyber security exercise “Cyber Shock 
3” from 27th May-7th June 2024. The theme of 
the exercise was to improve the cybersecurity 
posture by building Cyber Resilience to counter 
Ransomware & Cyber Extortion. Finance sector 
organizations like Banks, Insurance Companies, 
SEBI Regulated Entities have participated in this 
cyber drill. 
• 
All authorized entities/banks issuing PPIs in the 
country have been advised by CERT-In through 
RBI to carry out special audit by empaneled 
auditors of CERT-In on a priority basis.

Internet Governance and Security of Cyber Space
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
169
• 
The snapshot of activities performed by CSIRT-Fin 
this year, is as follows:
	
o	
Handling of security incidents in collabora-
tion with CERT-In which included security 
incidents related to vulnerable services, bot-
nets, open services and phishing incidents. 
Entities have also been on boarded to 
CERT-In’s Cyber Swachhta Kendra (CSK) 
for providing automated feeds regarding 
malware infections, botnets and vulnerable 
services.
	
o	
Issuing of vulnerability notes and virus alerts 
along with CERT-In.
	
o	
Tailored threat intelligence alerts for proac-
tive measures were sent to financial sec-
tor constituency and entities have been on 
boarded on CERT-In’s automated threat in-
telligence platform
6.6	
Cyber Laws and Data Governance
MeitY is the custodian of two Acts, namely, the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 (“IT Act”) and the Digital Personal 
Data Protection Act, 2023 (“DPDP Act”).
IT Act— The IT Act was enacted on 17th October, 2000 
with a view to (a) provide legal recognition of electronic 
records, (b) facilitate e-governance, e-transaction and 
e-commerce and (c) deter computer-based crimes. The 
IT Act was amended in 2008 by incorporating provisions 
relating to protection of sensitive personal data, 
exemption from liability to intermediaries, protection of 
critical information infrastructure, penal provisions for 
new forms of cybercrime such as obscenity, sexually 
explicit materials, identity theft, cheating by personation, 
cyber terrorism, etc. The IT Act has been recently 
amended through the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of 
Provisions) Act, 2023 [vide Serial No. 32 and entries 
relating thereto in the Schedule] to amend certain 
provisions for decriminalization and rationalisation of 
offences to further enhance trust-based governance 
for ease of living and doing business. The Jan Vishwas 
(Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2023 may be accessed 
at the following link:
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/248047.pdf
Further, it may be noted that MeitY is regularly 
undertaking review of the existing rules under the IT 
Act with an attempt to overhaul them to address many 
present-day and emerging challenges in the cyberspace. 
In order to achieve the Government policy which is 
aimed at ensuring an Open, Safe & Trusted Internet 
and accountability of intermediaries including the social 
media intermediaries to users in India and to address 
other emerging issues relating to digital media entities, 
the Ministry of Electronics and IT (MeitY) in exercise of 
its powers under the Information Technology Act, 2000, 
has made and notified the Information Technology 
(Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) 
Rules, 2021 (“IT Rules, 2021”) on 25th February, 2021, 
which were subsequently amended on 28th October, 
2022. 
Based on the above amendment, the Government, then, 
establishes three Grievance Appellate Committees on 
28th January 2023. The Grievance Appellate Committee 
(GAC) is an online dispute resolution mechanism. The 
entire appeal process, from filing to decision, is in digital 
mode. GAC functions as a regulatory body overseeing the 
resolution of appeals related to social media platforms, 
including but not limited to Facebook, Instagram, 
WhatsApp, Twitter, LinkedIn, etc. The GAC deals with the 
appeals of users (Digital Nagriks) aggrieved by decisions 
of Grievance Officers of social media intermediaries and 
other intermediaries on complaints of users or victims 
against violation of the rules and any other matters 
pertaining to the computer resources made available by 
the intermediary.
The said rules were further amended on 6th April 2023, to 
regulate the manner in which responsible online games 
may be made available in India and put a framework and 
guardrails to prescribe and regulate permissible online 
games. The latest amended IT Rules, 2021 may be 
accessed at the following link:

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Internet Governance and Security of Cyber Space
Annual
2024-2025
170
https://upload.indiacode.nic.in/showfile?actid=AC_CE
N_45_76_00001_200021_1517807324077&type=ru
le&filename=information_technology_(intermediary_
guidelines_and_digital_media_ethics_code)_
rules,_2021_(updated_06.04.2023)-.pdf
DPDP Act - The Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 
2023 has been enacted, which provides for the processing 
of digital personal data in a manner that recognizes both 
the rights of the individuals to protect their personal 
data and the need to process such personal data for 
lawful purposes and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. The URL of the notified Act is as under: 
https://www.meity.gov.in/writereaddata/files/Digital%20
Personal%20Data%20Protection%20Act%202023.pdf
Ministry has held discussions on the DPDP Act with 
the objective of seeking inputs on various aspects 
of the Act with a diverse range of stakeholders of the 
technology ecosystem including industry associations, 
startups, IT professionals, think tanks and lawyers. In 
accordance with the procedure provided in the Manual 
of Parliamentary Procedures published by the Ministry of 
Parliamentary Affairs, subordinate legislation, including 
DPDP Rules such as those framed under the DPDP Act 
are required to be published for the purpose of seeking 
public feedback/comments, which are being drafted by 
the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology.

CHAPTER
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
171
Activities of the HRD Division, MeitY are targeted to 
support the availability of trained human resources for the 
manufacturing and service sectors of the electronics and 
IT industry. Initiatives include identifying gaps emerging 
from the formal sector and planning programmes in 
non-formal and formal sectors to meet these gaps. This 
includes skill development in the domain of electronics 
and IT and related areas. The skill development activities 
of the Ministry are primarily being taken up by its two 
autonomous societies viz. National Institute of Electronics 
and Information Technology (NIELIT), and Centre for 
Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC). In 
addition, the various organizations and attached offices 
under the Department viz. ERNET India, Digital India 
Corporation, CSC E-Governance Services India Limited, 
STQC, NIC, etc. are also engaged in training various 
stakeholders in small numbers. The following schemes/ 
projects are under implementation for capacity building 
and skill development in the domain of E&ICT:
7.1	
Post Graduate and Doctorate Level
7.1.1	 Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme for Electronics & IT
MeitY, with the approval of the Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs (CCEA) had initiated ‘Visvesvaraya 
PhD Scheme’ with the objective to enhance the number 
of PhDs in Electronics System Design & Manufacturing 
(ESDM) and IT/IT Enabled Services (IT/ITES) sectors 
in the country in 2014.  Phase-I of Visvesvaraya PhD 
Scheme with a budget of `466 Crores, initially approved 
for 9 years from 2014, is extended till Mar 2025.
Status of Phase-I of the Scheme: 
• 
754 Full-time and 158 Part-time PhD candidates 
completed their PhD
• 
62 Full-time and 08 Part-time PhD candidates 
submitted Thesis
• 
72 Full-time and 107 Part-time PhD candidates 
currently pursuing PhD
• 
158 Young Faculty Research Fellowships awarded
• 
85 Patents filed
• 
5750 Research Papers published
• 
Workshops held for assessment of quality of 
research
Research has been undertaken under the scheme in 
emerging research areas viz. Image Processing, DSP, 
Pattern Recognition, 3D Printing, 5G Communications, 
AI, Big Data, Blockchain, Distributed Computing, 
Cyber Security, Green and Sustainable ICT, Quantum 
Computing/ Communication, Semiconductor Design 
etc. Some of the granted Patents of Visvesvaraya PhD 
Scholars: 
• 
Method of Reducing DoS Attacks Using Voice 
Response in IoT Systems
• 
System for providing energy management in smart 
grid environment
• 
System For Detecting Type of Sleep Disorders and 
Method of Operating Thereof
• 
Electrochemical Measurement of Creatinine in 
Serum
• 
A Device for Assessment of Seed Pre-Treatments
• 
Spoof Recognition in an Ear Biometric System
• 
Image Compression for Transmission
• 
A Novel Microfluidic Approach for Bio-Mems 
Applications
• 
A 
completely 
miniaturized 
on-chip 
electron 
paramagnetic resonance sensor
Capacity Building
Skill India
7

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Skill India
Annual
2024-2025
172
Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme Phase-II
Based on assessment of Phase-I, demand from the 
institutions and role of such scheme in strengthening 
research eco-system, Phase-II of Visvesvaraya PhD 
Scheme, was initiated with an outlay of `481.93 Crore for 
9 years w.e.f. Academic Year 2022-23. Salient features 
of the scheme are:
• 
1000 Full-time PhD seats in the areas of ESDM & 
IT/ITES.
• 
Current monthly rates under the scheme: `38,750/- 
(1st & 2nd Year), then `43,750/-.
• 
225 Post-Doctoral Fellowships.
• 
One time support for 250 Candidates (50 
candidates/year) for 6 months Visit to Labs Abroad. 
• 
Support for International Conference up to `1.5 
Lakh.
• 
Contingency Research Grant @ `1.20 Lakh/year 
per Full Time PhD
• 
150 Part-time PhD seats & 50 “Young Faculty 
Research Fellowships” to be awarded.
• 
One time award of `3.0 Lakh for Part Time PhD 
candidates after completion of PhD. 
• 
YFRF Fellowship & Contingency Grant @ 
`20,000/- per month & `5 Lakh/year respectively 
up to 5 years.
Status of Phase-II of the Scheme:
1.	
600 Full-time & 90 Part-time PhD seats allocated 
to 116 institutions
2.	
492 Full-time and 20 Part-time enrolments reported 
in 96 and 21 institutions respectively
3.	
Finalization of 75 PDF & 30 YFRF awards underway
4.	
One workshop for review of research work of PhD 
scholars held at IIT Mandi in September, 2024
5.	
Research undertaken in emerging research 
areas viz. AI, Big Data, Blockchain, 6G & 5G 
Communications, Semiconductor Design, Cyber 
Security, Green and Sustainable ICT, Quantum 
Technologies, etc. 
7.2	
Graduate level
Scheme of Financial Assistance for setting up of 
Electronics and ICT Academies
MeitY has setup seven (07) Electronics and ICT 
Academies at premier and leading academic institutions 
viz. (i) IIT Guwahati (ii) IIT Kanpur (iii) IIT Roorkee (iv) 
IIITDM Jabalpur (v) MNIT Jaipur (vi) NIT Warangal and 
(vii) NIT Patna to address the requirement of training the 
faculty in the latest as well as upcoming/ emerging areas 
of Electronics and ICT for Engineering and other streams. 
These academies have been conducting the ‘Faculty 
Development Programs’ (FDPs)/ courses in Conventional 
Classroom mode, NKN mode, and online mode. Under 
the scheme, a total of 3,47,867 beneficiaries have been 
Financial Components under “Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme Phase-II

Skill India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
173
trained under 2,010 faculty development programs 
(Faculty: 1,13,106; Students/ Others: 2,34,761) by these 
E&ICT Academies.
Electronics & ICT Academy Scheme – Phase-II
MeitY has approved the ‘Electronics & ICT Academy 
Scheme - Phase-II’ project on 26.04.2024. The project 
aims to train 1,35,000 faculty members/trainers in 
emerging technology areas, aligning with MeitY’s vision. 
Phase-II would continue to focus on improving faculty 
quality in engineering colleges and technical institutions 
by leveraging the existing 7 E&ICT academies and 
extending to other institutions, particularly in tier-2/tier-
3 areas. The project would be implemented through 14 
implementing Agencies viz. (i) IIT Guwahati, Assam, 
(ii) IIT Roorkee, Uttarakhand, (iii) IIT, Kanpur, Utttar 
Pradesh, (iv) NIT Warangal, Telangana, (v) NIT Patna, 
Bihar, (vi) IIITDM Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, (vii) MNIT 
Jaipur, Rajasthan, (viii) ICT Academy, Tamil Nadu, (ix) 
NIELIT, Aurangabad, Maharashtra, (x) NIELIT, Calicut, 
Kerala, (xi) NIELIT, Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh, (xii) 
CDAC, Mohali, Punjab, (xiii) CDAC, Patna, Bihar; and, 
(xiv) CDAC, Hyderabad, Telangana. 
Under the scheme, a total of 7,458 beneficiaries have 
been trained under 137 faculty development programs 
(Faculty: 6,553; Students/ Others: 905) by these E&ICT 
Academies
7.3	
Vocational Skill Development Level
I.	
Schemes for Skill Development in the ESDM 
sector
MeitY has approved the following two schemes for 
Skill Development in the ESDM Sector viz. “Scheme 
for Financial Assistance to select states/UTs for skill 
Development in Electronics System Design and 
Manufacturing (ESDM) sector” (Scheme-1) and “Skill 
Development in ESDM for Digital India” (Scheme-2) to 
facilitate creation of an eco-system for development of 
ESDM Sector in the entire country.
Scheme-1 was approved with a total target of 90,000 
candidates. This Scheme is being implemented in the 
States/UTs viz. Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, UT of 
Jammu & Kashmir, UT of Ladakh, Karnataka, Punjab, 
Uttarakhand, and Uttar Pradesh (Kerala left the Scheme 
in 2017). This Scheme is implemented through the 
State Implementing Agencies (SIAs) nominated by their 
respective States/UTs. These SIAs are responsible for 
implementation and creating necessary mechanisms for 
implementation, monitoring, and placement within overall 
Scheme Guidelines approved by MeitY.
Scheme-2 has a total target of 3,28,000. This Scheme 
is being implemented through NIELIT-PMU which is 
operating and managing the Scheme under the aegis of 
MeitY in 32 States/ UTs. 
The cumulative target of both the Schemes is 4,18,000 
and training is being implemented in NSQF-compliant 
courses (upto1stApril 2022 at Level L1-L2 to L5 courses 
and now at Level L3 to L5-L6 courses) at PAN-India 
level. Both the above Schemes are being implemented 
concurrently with NIELIT acting as the Program 
Management Unit (PMU). Under both of the Schemes so 
far, a total of 4,93,928 candidates have been registered, 
4,93,926 trained, out of which, a total of 3,72,834 
candidates have been certified and 1,37,119 candidates 
have been placed under the schemes.
To provide thrust to employability, an industry-linked 
demand-based Letter of Intent (LOI) mechanism was 
adopted under the Schemes, i.e. “Place & Train” model, 
wherein 58,918 candidates have been trained and 
55,153 candidates have been placed. Also, to ensure 
the efficacy of training and employment of the candidates 
enrolled under “Place and Train” model online/offline 
monitoring of placed candidates have been conducted in 
respective industries premises.
II.	
Efforts 
to 
generate 
greater 
participation 
of Industry through Sector Skill Councils-
Electronics, Telecom, IT/ITeS
MeitY is actively associating and supporting the various 
skill development activities of the following Sector Skill 
Councils (SSCs) concerning the domains addressed by 
this Ministry:
a.	
Electronics Sector Skill Council of India (ESSCI)
b.	
Telecom Sector Skill Council (TSSC)
c.	
IT-ITeS Sector Skill Council (NASSCOM)
The above Sector Skill Councils have taken up 
various courses for the skilling of candidates in their 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Skill India
Annual
2024-2025
174
respective domains. The Ministry has also supported the 
development of new job roles/NOSs with ESSCI, TSSC, 
and IT/ITeS Sector Skill Council in the area of Electronics 
and IT. 
7.4	
Capacity Building in Niche Areas
I.	
Programme in Chips to Startup (C2S) 
The C2S Programme aims to train 85,000 number of 
Specialized Manpower at 113 participating Institutions 
(including Academia, R&D Organization, Startups, 
MSMEs) over a period of 5 years in the area of VLSI 
and Embedded System Design and leapfrog in ESDM 
space by way of inculcating the culture of System-on-
Chip (SoC)/ System Level Design at Bachelors, Masters 
and Research level and act as a catalyst for growth of 
Start-ups involved in fabless design. 
The programme would not only generate 85,000 number 
of Specialized Manpower at B.Tech, M.Tech & PhD level 
in Chip design area; but also results in the development 
of 20 Systems/ 175 Chips/ 30 reusable IP Cores and 
incubating 25 startups in this area. Details of the 
Programme are available at http://c2s.gov.in/
• 
Under 
the 
programme, 
113 
Organizations 
across the country (Including Academia/ R&D 
Organization/ Startup/ MSME) are being supported 
by way of providing centralized access of EDA tools, 
Fabrication and financial support for implementing 
R&D projects for IP/ Chip/ SoC development.
• 
ChipIN Centre, setup at C-DAC Bangalore as one 
stop centre for chip designers, is providing following 
design and fabrication services to PIs under C2S 
Programme:
A.	
Design infrastructure support: 
	
1)	
EDA tools commissioned and onboarded 
about 240 institutions (against a target of 
100 institutions). Details at https://c2s.gov.
in/EDA_Tool_Support.jsp
	
2)	
Commissioning of FPGA Boards: Details at 
https://c2s.gov.in/DetailsFPGA.jsp
	
	
i)	
FPGA Boards from XILINX(AMD) has 
been provided to 100 PIs to provide 
hands-on training on FPGA prototyping 
to the students. 
	
	
ii)	
Some of the Advanced FPGA boards 
are centrally hosted at ChipIN Centre 
and are made accessible to institutions 
participating in C2S Programme. These 
boards are designed for advanced 
applications, such as AI acceleration, 
data 
analytics, 
high-performance 
computing, 
advanced 
hardware 
prototyping, etc. 
B.	
Design flow trainings
i.	
ChipIN Centre has collaborated with semiconductor 
industry and providing regular training on ASIC 
design flow and EDA Tools. So far, 141 training 
sessions conducted by the ChipIN Centre in 
collaboration with SCL Mohali, IMEC, MUSE 
Semiconductors and Semiconductor Industry such 
as Synopsys, Cadence, Siemens EDA, Ansys, 
Keysight Technologies, AMD (Xilinx) and IBM. 
The details are available at https://c2s.gov.in/
training2024.jsp
	
ChipIN Centre, as VCA (Value-chain Aggregator) 
of SCL Mohali, is providing MPW fabrication 
support to 113 PIs for fabrication of their designs at 
180nm, SCL Mohali.
ii.	
SMART Lab Facility: 
	
VLSI SMART Lab Facility has been setup at NIELIT 
Calicut (with two labs having 100 hardware system) 
to train about 1 Lakh candidates in 5 Years (20,000 
candidates /year) in Hardware design including 
VLSI Design, Embedded hardware design, Board 
design, etc. through NSQF aligned Courses and by 
providing remote access of FPGA boards ported 
with SHAKTI/ VEGA Processors. Total of 38,622 
candidates have been trained till October 2024 
for different courses offered through SMART Lab. 
Details of SMART Lab courses are available at 
https://c2s.gov.in/NIELIT_Calicut.jsp  
iii.	
M.Tech and M.DesProgramme in Electronics 
Product Design
	
To train manpower in the area of Electronics 
Product Design for designing innovative products, 
rapid prototyping & development and hands-on 
experience with cutting edge technology and 

Skill India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
175
processes, MeitY has initiated following programme 
with an objective to promote indigenous design and 
development of Electronics System in the country.
	
a)	
M.Des programme/Executive develop-
ment programme in Electronics Product 
Design:
	
	
M.Des programme/Executive development 
programme in Electronics Product Design 
has been initiated at IIT Guwahati in March 
2021 to graduate 120 M.Des students and 
4 PhD Student in Electronics Product De-
sign over the period of 5 years. Under the 
Programme, so far, 82 M.Des students have 
been enrolled. Besides this, Executive De-
velopment Programme are being conducted 
regularly with Industry experts.
	
b)	
Special Manpower Development Pro-
gramme (SMDP)- M. Tech. in Electronic 
Product Design and Skill Development:
	
	
M. Tech. in Electronic Product Design and 
Skill Development has been initiated at 
IISc Bangalore in March 2021 to train 305 
Students/Faculty (125 students via M.Tech 
Programme, 144 Students via Short-term 
Certificate//Workshop and 36 Faculties vis 
Faculty Development Programme ) over the 
period of 5 years. Under the Programme, so 
far, 54 M.Tech students have been enrolled. 
Besides this, Faculty Development Pro-
gramme, workshops are being conducted 
regularly with Industry experts.
II.	
Information Security Education and Awareness 
(ISEA) Project:
	
The Ministry is implementing the Information 
Security Education & Awareness (ISEA) Project 
for generating human resources in the area 
of Information Security and creating general 
awareness on various aspects of cyber hygiene & 
cyber security among the masses. 
	
ISEA Phase-II (2014-2023): Under the project, a 
total of 94,306 candidates were trained in various 
formal/non-formal courses in Information Security 
through 52 institutions (further, 5 Technical 
Universities participating under the project have 
reported around 2.90 Lakh candidates as trained 
in formal courses in their respective affiliated 
colleges). Besides this, 28,440 Government 
officials have been trained in various short-
term courses in the area of Information Security 
through direct/ e-learning/ VILT mode. Under the 
awareness activities, 1,567 awareness workshops 
on Information Security were organized across the 
country for school & colleges students, teachers, 
faculty, Government personnel, LEAs, general 
users, parents, women, CSCs, etc. covering 
3,53,558 participants. 1,24,909 school teachers 
were trained as master trainers and around 6.29 
crore estimated beneficiaries were covered through 
indirect mode.
	
ISEA Phase-III (Oct. 2023 onwards): The project 
was approved in October 2023 with a targeted ap-
proach for the development of human resources for 
safe, trusted, and secure cyberspace. The project 
envisaged generating 2.75 lakh human resources 
in the area of Information Security over a period of 
5 years comprising 45,000 skilled & certified Cyber 
Security Professionals (i.e. CISOs, Deputy CISOs, 
Associate team of CISOs/Aspirants) and train-
ing of 2.3 lakh students (UG/ PG level), research 
scholars, faculty, etc. in various formal/non-formal 
courses in the advanced and emerging areas of 
Information Security and innovation activities. In 
addition, more than 12 crore beneficiaries compris-
ing school children & teachers, college students & 
faculty, women, specially-abled, senior citizens, 
government employees, MSMEs, other non-IT us-
ers, CSCs, NGOs, CSOs, etc. are envisaged to be 
covered under the Cyber Aware Digital Naagrik 
(Mass Awareness) component through direct/indi-
rect mode. The project is implemented through 50 
premier academic institutions (IITs/ NITs), autono-
mous organizations of MeitY (C-DAC/ NIELIT), and 
Technical Universities in a hub-n-spoke mode. So 
far, 990 candidates have been trained in various 
academic/innovation activities. In addition, 471 
awareness workshops on Information Security 
have been organized covering 1,27,186 partici-
pants and 1,966 school teachers, faculty and po-

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Skill India
Annual
2024-2025
176
lice officers have been trained as master trainers.
III.	
FutureSkills PRIME (Programme for Re- skilling/
Up-skilling of IT Manpower for Employability)
	
MeitY in collaboration with SSC-NASSCOM has 
initiated a programme titled FutureSkills PRIME 
(Programme 
for 
Re-skilling/Up-skilling 
of 
IT 
Manpower for Employability). The programme is 
aimed at re-skilling/ up-skilling of IT professionals 
in 11 new/emerging technologies which include 
Augmented/Virtual Reality, Internet of Things, 
Big Data Analytics, Artificial Intelligence, Robotic 
Process Automation, Additive Manufacturing/ 3D 
Printing, Cloud Computing, Social & Mobile, Cyber 
Security, Blockchain and semiconductors.
	
FutureSkills 
PRIME 
Programme 
is 
based 
on ‘aggregator of aggregators’ approach for digital 
skills training on a national scale, with the entire 
platform being hosted online. Premium content 
from Indian and global content providers is 
aggregated on the FutureSkills PRIME portal and 
made available to candidates, to facilitate any time 
anywhere learning, in line with their aptitude and 
aspirations.
	
Under the programme IT-ITeS Sector Skills Council 
(SSC), NASSCOM is the Key Implementing Agency. 
To strengthen physical and digital connectivity, the 
existing pan-India presence & skilling capabilities 
of training providers (SSC NASSCOM, NIELIT, 
C-DAC etc.) is also leveraged. Towards this, 40 
C-DAC/ NIELIT Centres are identified as Lead & 
Co-Lead Resource Centres (RCs) to institutionalize 
the blended-learning training programmes in a hub 
and spoke mode for the 11 emerging technologies.
	
Under the FutureSkills PRIME as of 31.12.2024, a 
total of 20Lakh+ candidates have signed-up on the 
FutureSkills PRIME portal (https:// futureskillsprime.
in/), and around 8.93 Lakh candidates have been 
enrolled in various courses, out of which a total 
of 4.34 Lakh candidates have completed the 
courses. Also, the Resource Centres (Lead/ Co-
Lead Centres), have trained 11,519 Government 
Officials (GoT) and 2,367 Trainers (ToT). Moreover, 
1447 Bootcamps are organized.
IV.	
Capacity 
building 
for 
human 
resource 
development in Unmanned Aircraft Systems 
(Drone and related Technology)
	
MeitY has approved the project entitled “Capacity 
Building for Human Resource Development in 
Unmanned Aircraft System(Drone) and Related 
Technology)” on 11.07.2022. The primary objective 
of the programme is to leverage collaborative 
activities in human resource development through 
capacity building in education and training in the 
area of UAS. The programme is conceived to 
achieve the broad objectives which include
	
I.	
To enhance capacity & capabilities of select 
institutions in identified WTs on Unmanned 
Aircraft Systems, 
	
II.	
To institutionalize a collaborative ecosystem 
through identified Resource Centres (RCs) 
and Participating Institutions (PIs) for syn-
ergy of capabilities & expertise
	
III.	
To foster development of competent human 
resources at various levels including Post 
Graduate & Graduate programs, PG Diplo-
ma/Certificate programs, Faculty Updation 
and Master Trainers in niche areas of UAS
	
IV.	
To promote entrepreneurial mindset and 
nurture technical talent among the student 
community 
	
V.	
To nurture technical talent and ideation 
among the student community through IPR 
generation, Competitions, Workshops/ Con-
ferences, etc.
	
The project, implementation is being carried out by 
30 premium institutions, in a hub-n-spoke mode, 
comprising 5 Resource Centres; 15 Academic 
Participating Institutes (PI- Academic); and 10 
C-DAC/NIELIT Participating Institutes (PI-C-DAC/
NIELIT) Centers. The project aims to create an 
overall trained manpower of 42,560 which includes 
100 candidates undertaking M.Tech Degree in 
UAS/Drones, 4000 candidates undertaking Minor 
Degree/Retrofitting courses in UAS/Drones, 1000 
Master Trainer/FUP, 32,400 students trained 
through non-formal short term and certificate 
course.

Skill India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
177
	
Under the project, as of 31.12.2024, 13,668 
beneficiaries have been trained through various 
formal and non-formal activities. A total of 288 
Bootcamps has been organized and participated 
by 10,870 candidates, 17 Faculty Updation 
Programme FUPs) conducted wherein 417 Faculty 
members have been trained, 07 workshops have 
been conducted which were participated by 555 
participants, 22 IPR-papers with 74 participants, 
04 IPR-patents with 11 participants and 80 Proof of 
Concepts (POC) with 414 participants have been 
submitted. IIT Kanpur has started a new M.Tech in 
Unmanned Aerial System Engineering from August, 
2023 onwards and has enrolled 23 students in two 
batches. Post Graduate Diploma in Unmanned 
Aircraft System Programming (PG-DUASP)’ has 
been launched by C-DAC Pune and the course 
has been started with the effect of September 
2023. It has enrolled 25 students at various CDAC/
NIELIT Center. Also, 03 Minor degree programs 
have been initiated at IIT Kanpur, IIIT Hyderabad, 
and IIITDM Kurnool respectively, and enrolled 66 
students. A total of 52 Retrofitting Electives have 
been started by various participating institutes and 
enrolled 1213 students.
V.	
Empowering Police Personnel and Governance 
Officials of NE states through IT and Cyber 
Security Training.
	
a)	
The Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (MeitY) has approved the “Em-
powering Police Personnel and Government 
Officials of NE States through IT and Cyber 
Security Training”  project on 26.02.2024. 
The primary objective of the proposed pro-
ject is  to enhance IT literacy, strengthen 
cyber security, and improve cybercrime in-
vestigation skills. It focuses on training 4,940 
personnel in handling digital evidence, cyber 
forensics, and utilizing advanced tools. Key 
objectives include promoting awareness of 
cyber laws, enhancing data security, ena-
bling efficient technology use in governance, 
building incident response capacity, foster-
ing collaboration among stakeholders, and 
bridging the digital divide in remote areas. 
The program also emphasizes public aware-
ness, integrates a Learning Management 
System (LMS), and develops a Virtual Train-
ing Environment (VTE) for hands-on cyber 
security training.
	
b)	
In the North East states, instances of sys-
tem intrusion, identity theft, and information 
exploitation have already occurred within 
the states themselves, across international 
borders, and between interstate borders. To 
address this issue, the Police Forces require 
enhanced training in Information, Tech-
nology at a general level, as well as more 
comprehensive training specifically focused 
on cyber security. It is crucial to extend this 
training to a significant portion of the ac-
tive Police Force. Additionally, the general 
population and state government officials, in 
particular, need extensive training in system 
security and device security to safeguard 
themselves against potential cyber crimi-
nals. The objective of this project is to equip 
police personnel and Govt. Officials pre-
dominantly with the necessary knowledge to 
effectively combat cyber threats and crime. 
It also aims to provide state government of-
ficials with a comprehensive understanding 
of cyber crimes and information security to 
prevent cyber-attacks and exploitation.
	
c)	
Under the Empowering Police Person-
nel and Government Officials of NE States 
through IT and Cyber Security Training as of 
31.12.2024, 982 Government Officials have 
been trained.
VI.	
AI Capacity Building Program for Schools: 
Empowering Students with FutureSkills
	
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY) has approved the project titled “AI Capac-
ity Building Program for Schools: Empowering Stu-
dents with FutureSkills” to be implemented by the 
RCC Institute of Information Technology (RCCIIT). 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Skill India
Annual
2024-2025
178
The project initiative aims to revolutionize AI education 
across Eastern and North-East India by empowering 300 
specialized teachers from 300 schools with advanced 
AI knowledge and skills, while also educating 1,200 
teachers from diverse academic backgrounds, along 
with Headmasters (HMs), on AI and its applications. It 
will provide hands-on AI training to 1,200 students from 
classes XI and XII and foster AI awareness among 
3,600 students from classes VIII to X in 60 adopted 
schools. The program includes mentoring AI curriculum 
implementation for classes VIII to XII, benefiting 
approximately 18,000 students. Additionally, 30 faculty 
members of RCCIIT will undergo intensive AI training, 
supported by the development of four specialized AI 
labs and the retrofitting of computer labs in 60 schools 
to make them AI-ready. This comprehensive initiative 
lays the foundation for widespread AI literacy and skill 
development in the region.
Progress: 
Centralized AI Training Center (Lab and Seminar Hall) 
with 100 desktop, high end workstation and notebook, 
Smart board and utilities have been completed. The 
Trainers’ Training, Faculty Development Programme, 
Selection of Partner Schools and the Curriculum of AI 
Courses for Class VIII to XII in collaboration with Intel 
have been completed. Development of Robotics Lab, 
Web portal and LMS, Subsequent phases of FDP and 
Trainers’ Training are ongoing.
7.5	
Indian Nanoelectronics Users Program -Idea to 
Innovation (INUP-i2i)
Based on the grand success of project “Indian 
Nanoelectronics 
Users 
Programme 
(INUP)-Phase 
I” and Phase II”- a joint project at IISc, Bangalore 
and IIT Bombay, an umbrella project entitled Indian 
Nanoelectronics Users Program-idea to Innovation 
(INUP-i2i) is being implemented by IISc, Bangalore, IIT 
Delhi, IIT Madras, IIT Kharagpur, IIT Guwahati and IIT 
Bombay.
The project aims to take the ‘open national nano centers’ 
concept to the next stage, while retaining the key aspects 
of training at different levels introduced in the initial phases 
of INUP. The project INUP-i2i is supporting researchers 
in the area of nanoelectronics across the country by 
organizing the hands-on workshops as well as to train 
researchers/users by undertaking the R&D projects on 
different aspects of nanoelectronics and mentor the 
start-ups in nano area. The approach adopted under 
this project has been to make available large research 
facilities created at nanoelectronics centres. 
So far 49 familiarization workshops, 42 Hands-on-training 
workshops, 36 Industrial trainings and 10 Hackathon 
have been conducted. More than 8000 skilled manpower 
has been trained and around 348 short term and 220 
mid-term R&D projects are being supported under the 
project.
33 startups in the nanotechnology domain and 52 
institutions including IIITs/NITs/CUs/SUs/PUs are being 
supported through Hub and Spoke model under the 
program. All the nanocentres are closely connected to a 
number of institutions across the country who are being 
encouraged to promote their students getting trained at 
the state-of-art experimental facilities. 
NSQF Certification
Under the project INUP-i2i, two courses have been 
developed and approved under National Skill Qualification 
Framework (NSQF) by NCVET in Feb 2023:
a.	
Foundation 
Program 
on 
Nanoscience 
& 
Technology:   https://nqr.gov.in/qualifications/3809
b.	
Advanced 
Program 
on 
Nano 
Science 
& 
Technology: https://nqr.gov.in/qualifications/3808
The Qualification Files and Model curriculums for both 
programs are available on the NQR Portal.
INUP Users’ meet
The INUP Users’ Meet, a national-level event, was held 
on August 10, 2024, at IIT Bombay, in collaboration with 
IIT Guwahati, IIT Delhi, IIT Kharagpur, IIT Madras, and 
IISc Bangalore. The event celebrated the achievements 
and future directions of the INUP program, bringing 
together approximately 350 researchers, academicians, 
industry professionals, startups, and INUP users. 
Shri S. Krishnan, Secretary, MeitY, inaugurated the 
meet as the Chief Guest and delivered a keynote 
address highlighting INUP’s pivotal role in advancing 
nanoelectronics research in India. The event featured 

Skill India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
179
success stories, keynote addresses by eminent experts, 
technical sessions, poster presentations, and interactive 
discussions to foster collaboration and innovation. 
Sessions at INUP Users’ Meet
7.6	
Development of North-Eastern Region by 
enhancing the Training/ Education capacity in 
the Information, Electronics & Communications 
Technology (IECT) Area:
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY) is implementing a Project approved by the Cabinet 
with budget outlay of Rs.296.95 Crore (GIA of Rs.269.62 
Crore). The project objective includes up-gradation of the 
three existing NIELIT centers located at Imphal, Aizawl, 
Gangtok; Setting up of seven new Extension centers at 
Senapati and Churachandpur in Manipur; Dibrugarh, 
Jorhat and Kokrajhar in Assam; Lunglei in Mizoram; 
Pasighat in Arunachal Pradesh; and upgradation of two 
existing extension centers located at Chuchuyimlang in 
Nagaland and Tezpur in Assam to increase the training 
capacity from 3,080 per year to 14,400 per year from the 
5th year onwards. 
Presently all the NIELIT Centres/ extension centers are 
operational from permanent/ temporary premises. Six 
(06) NIELIT Centers i.e. Imphal, Aizwal, Churachandpur, 
Kokrajhar, Tezpur and Chuchuyimlang had been 
inaugurated on 16th and 17th September, 2021; another 
four (04) Centres viz. Pasighat, Senapati, Jorhat and 
Dibrugarh had been inaugurated on 6th May, 2022; 
Gangtok Centre (01) had also been inaugurated on 
8th April, 2023 and are operational from its permanent 
campuses; the remaining NIELIT Centre, namely NIELIT 
Lunglei (01) has been completed in all respect by 31st 
March, 2023 and is functional. 
As of now, the annual training capacity of these centers 
(including six centers operational from temporary 
locations at Guwahati and Silchar in Assam; Itanagar 
and Tezu in Arunachal Pradesh; Shillong and Tura in 
Meghalaya) is around 20,000 candidates. The Project 
has been completed and Closure Report has been 
submitted by NIELIT.
7.7	
Establishment 
of 
Intelligent 
Educational 
Infrastructure (Smart) in Eklavya Model Residential 
Schools (EMRSs):
The project is approved by the MeitY to be implemented 
by ERNET India. The objective of the project is:
•	
Setting up of intelligent educational infrastructure 
(Smart) in Eklavya Model Residential Schools 
(EMRSs) by creating an echo system using the 
latest tools and technologies, which helps to 
improve the learning outcome.
•	
To provide Internet connectivity in Eklavya Model 
Residential Schools (EMRSs).
Under the project, total 328 EMR schools are covered in 
three phases (Phase-1: 48, Phase-2: 126 and Phase-3: 
154). All works including setting up of Internet link in 48 
EMR schools of Phase-1 have been completed. The 
smart classes have been setup in all 126 EMR schools 
and Internet link has been setup in 112 schools out of 
126 schools of Phase-2. The work of setting up internet 
link in the remaining schools is in progress. These smart 
classes are being used for promoting e-education in the 
growth and development of the tribal students and to 
bridge the digital divide by using latest technology. The 
works of setting up smart classes and connectivity in 
remaining 154 EMR schools of Phase-3 are in progress.
EMRS Lumla, Arunachal Pradesh

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Skill India
Annual
2024-2025
180
7.8	
Grass-Root Level
I.	
Create skill development facilities in deprived 
areas through the strengthening of the National 
Institute 
of 
Electronics 
and 
Information 
Technology (NIELIT)
	
MeitY is implementing a Project with the objective 
of upgrading three existing NIELIT centres located 
at Imphal, Aizawl, Gangtok; Setting up seven new 
Extension centres at Senapati and Churachandpur 
in Manipur; Dibrugarh, Jorhat, and Kokrajhar in 
Assam; Lunglei in Mizoram; Pasighat in Arunachal 
Pradesh; and Upgradation of two existing extension 
centres located at Chuchuyimlang in Nagaland and 
Tezpur in Assam to increase the training capacity 
from 3,080 per year to 14,400 per year from the 5th 
year onward. As of now the annual training capacity 
of these centres (including six centres operational 
from temporary locations at Guwahati and Silchar 
in Assam; Itanagar and Tezu in Arunachal Pradesh; 
Shillong and Tura in Meghalaya) is around 20,000 
candidates. Presently all the12 NIELIT Centres/
extension centres under the project are operational 
and providing skill training programs in the E&ICT 
domain. It is also to mention that at present 
there are 22 NIELIT Centres/ Extension Centres 
providing Skill Training Programmes across all 8 
NER states.
	
Also, MeitY is supporting for setting up NIELIT 
Centres / Extension Centres at Muzzafarpur 
and Buxar in Bihar, UT of Daman, Bikaner in 
Rajasthan, Shillong in Meghalaya, Pilibhit in Uttar 
Pradesh, Tirupati in Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad 
in Telangana and Chitradurga in Karnataka in FY 
2024-25.
II.	
Capacity Building in IECT including training 
in Digital Skill sets and Current Industry 
Demanding Technologies for various sections 
of society in the NE States:
 
The objectives of the project are to fulfil the gap 
in technological skilling and awareness, NIELIT 
centres in the North Eastern Region have 
conceptualized this project with the following 
objectives:
	
(a)	
To provide awareness and training in IECT 
to citizens spread across different sections 
of society by 08(eight) NIELIT Centres locat-
ed in the NE Region using mobile ICT labs to 
reach out to all places including remote cor-
ners of the North Eastern States to provide 
essential training.
	
(b)	
To promote awareness & training related to 
Digital Inclusion/ Digital services to common 
citizens including Farmers, Women, Elderly 
persons, School and College students, and-
school dropouts.
	
(c)	
To impart job-oriented value addition cours-
es to the Graduates, polytechnic diploma 
holders/students in the utility areas such as 
Digital marketing, Solar Technology, Com-
puter Applications, Computerized Account-
ing, Cyber Security, AR-VR, Blockchain, 
IoT, Machine Learning, AI, Drone Piloting 
Technology, Multimedia, etc., to fulfil the lo-
cal needs.
	
(d)	
To train the graduate in current Industry 
demanding technologies such as Program-
ming or coding, Web or Mobile, Database, 
System Administration and Security, Soft-
ware Testing/ QA/ Management, Technical 
Support and BPO Expert etc. to improve em-
ployability.
	
(e)	
Up-skilling and re-skilling of NIELIT staff and 
school teachers in emerging and future tech-
nologies. vi. To create and promote an eco-
system for local start-ups and entrepreneur-
ship development in the NIELIT Campuses 
of NE Region.
	
Under the project, so far a total of 1,70,377 
candidates have been trained.
III.	
Capacity Building Program Using ICT Tools & 
Technology to Enhance Livelihood of Weavers/
Artisans of Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC), 
Assam
	
MeitY has approved the project entitled “Capacity 
Building Program using ICT Tools & Technology 
to Enhance Livelihood of Weavers/ Artisans of 

Skill India
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
181
Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC), Assam” with 
an objective of training for Handloom community 
development at Two Districts of BTC, Assam i.e., 
Kokrajhar & Baksa using modern technologies 
like a computer embroidery machine, e-tailoring 
Technology, Design creation using CAD software, 
etc. and to train 5000 beneficiaries. Under the 
project, two high-end ICT Labs equipped with 
modem Hardware and handloom machinery have 
been developed at Baksa and Kokrajhar districts, 
BTC Assam, and, out of targeted 5000 Weavers 
& Artisans of Bodoland Tribal Community (BTC), 
there are 4600 beneficiaries already successfully 
completed their training on all parameters of 
Handloom Sectors like, raw material purchase to 
product preparation, by state-of-art design creation, 
product quality checking to packaging, marketing 
to selling and profit gain under this project. Another 
200 beneficiaries are now undergoing through 
training at Baksa and Kokrajhar district of BTC, 
Assam, on Graphics Design and training 400 
beneficiaries on Handloom machinery is ongoing; 
and, a total of 3,000 motifs and 5000+ designs 
have been created; and, 2 workshops have been 
organized at Baksa and Kokrajhar district of BTC, 
Assam with weavers & artisans, domain experts in 
the handloom sector, policymakers, and all other 
stakeholders.
7.9	
IT for Masses Programme
IT for Masses Programme is aimed at initiating/ 
promoting activities in IECT for focus groups (Women, 
Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe, Senior Citizens, 
Differently Abled & Economically Weaker Section) and 
underprivileged areas (North Eastern Region, Backward 
Districts and Blocks having more than 40% SC/ST 
population) for their development and empowerment. 
The activities undertaken are through Infrastructure 
Creation, Deployment of IT tools, Training, Capacity 
Building & Entrepreneurship Creation activities in IECT.
During year 2024 the following activities have been taken 
under the programme:
• 
IT & Electronics Training 
	
o	
Skill development in 81 Aspirational districts 
and 100 backward districts through NSQF 
aligned ICT courses for upliftment of SC/ST 
& Women (EWS) youths. 
• 
Infrastructure Creation 
	
o	
Modernisation of handloom sector at Leh 
through IT-enabled incubation centres. 
	
o	
Establishment of design and assembly labs 
for Solar-led products at Leh and Kargil dis-
tricts of Ladakh 
• 
Capacity Building 
	
o	
Establishment of CyberGyan lab for build-
ing capacity of engineering graduates/post 
graduates in cyber security. 
	
o	
Capacity building of engineering graduates/
post gradates in “IoT technologies” on PAN 
India level. 
	
o	
Capacity building of 10th /12th pass and grad-
uates in Multimedia and Animation, 3D print-
ing, Mechatronics etc. 
	
o	
Capacity building in IT services and digital 
marketing.
Till December 2024, around 10008 (SC: 5102, ST: 
2795, Women: 1124, EWS: 963 and OBC: 24) nos. of 
candidates have benefited.
Fee reimbursement to SC/ST Programme
As per the directions and guidelines received from 
NITI Aayog (erstwhile Planning Commission) by MeitY 
(erstwhile DeitY) vide their communication No.D.O.No.
M13054/2/2005-BC dated 05.09.2007, no fee should be 
charged from the SC and ST candidates for educational 
and skill development programmes by the Government 
and autonomous institutions and the expenditure for the 
Scheme should be accounted for from the SCSP and 
TSP fund of the respective Ministries/Departments. 
Since 2007-08, the National Institute of Electronics 
and Information Technology (NIELIT) is implementing 
the “Fee Reimbursement to SC/ST” programme. The 
aforesaid programme is a DBT on-boarded scheme 
in which free training is being provided to the SC/ST 
candidates in various formal, non- formal, and IT literacy 
courses pat NIELIT’s own centres under budgetary 
support of MeitY. 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Skill India
Annual
2024-2025
182
During the FY 2023-24, a total of 4704 Scheduled Caste 
and 16001 Scheduled Tribe Candidates benefitted under 
the Fee reimbursement programme.
7.10	 E-Learning Platform
I.	
OLabs NextG (OLabs Next Generation)
	
MeitY has approved the project titled “OLabs 
NextG: Next Generation Online Labs (OLabs) for 
schools” which is being implemented by CDAC, 
Mumbai jointly with Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, 
Kerala. OLabs portal (http://www.olabs.edu.in ) 
is a resource point for access to online labs that 
cover all experiments as per the CBSE curriculum 
for Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Science and also 
activities under Maths, Social Science, Computer 
Science, EDP, and Languages (English. Hindi, and 
Sanskrit). 173 labs Physics, Chemistry, Biology, 
and Maths are available in regional languages 
Hindi, Marathi, Malayalam, etc. OLabs NextG 
(OLabs Next Generation) which is aligned with the 
New Education Policy 2020 has been approved 
and jointly funded by MeitY and the Ministry of 
Education (MoE).
	
The objective of the project is to design and develop 
500 Online Labs and upgrade of existing 173 labs 
using the latest tools/ technologies for the students 
of classes VI- XII for various subjects, training of 
10,000 teachers/students from 200 schools. 
	
The project achievement till December 2024 are 
as:
	
a)	
Total of 423 labs in subjects Physics, Chem-
istry, Biology, Science, Mathematics, Social 
Science, Computer Science, and Languag-
es (English, Hindi and Sanskrit) for classes 
6th to 12th have been developed and avail-
able on OLabs website (olabs.edu.in). 
	
b)	
212 Labs of OLabs are also available on the 
Diksha virtual labs portal https://diksha.gov.
in/virtuallabs.html, 
	
c)	
OLabs mobile app (version-1.0.15) is hosted 
on GOV.in app store and Google Play Store. 
	
d)	
OLabs Windows installer (version 2.2): Cre-
ated three class wise separate installer in 
this version of installer i.e. for class 6 to 8, 
9-10 and 11-12.
	
e)	
4783 teachers trained and deployment of 
OLabs is done in 20 schools across India till 
December 2024.
 
f) 
OLabs offline version deployment was done 
in 142 schools (342 devices) in 33 districts of 
Rajasthan
	
g)	
OLabsThon: OLabs Hackathon was an-
nounced in December 2024 across India to 
invite innovative ideas into this pool of labs, 
Till 6th January 2025, 65 teams registered 
from the different colleges of India. The 
hackathon will be completed in February 
2025.
II.	
MedSIM2.0 (Online Skills Lab and Virtual 
Patient Cases)
	
MietY has approved a project titled ‘MedSIM 2.0- 
Online Skills Lab’ and Virtual Patient Cases for 
the development of a Medical Simulation platform 
for medical students being implemented jointly by 
CDAC, Thiruvananthapuram, Amrita University 
and AIIMS Bhubaneswar. 
MedSIM (Medical Simulation Platform for Medical 
Students) is a simulation-based medical education 
platform that allows medical students to enhance their 
clinical reasoning and judgment skills. 
Key objectives of the MedSIM (2.0) (http://medsim. in) 
is to design and develop a Preclinical and Paraclinical 
Online Skills Lab, develop New Virtual Patient Case 
Simulations to cover the entire MBBS curriculum, 
Aligned with MBBS Regulations 2020, National Medical 
Commission, enhance existing MedSIM (1.0) platform 
with Authoring tool, Learning Analytics, Assessment & 
Feedback and training of 5,000 medical students and 
1,000 medical faculty from 500 medical colleges. 
Under the project so far, a total of 100 clinical cases 
and 38 pre/para labs have been studied. Currently, 72 
simulation-based clinical cases and 25 skills lab have 
been added to the website from 24 departments.

CHAPTER
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
183
8.1	
Controller of Certifying Authorities (CCA)
8.1.1	 Introduction
The Controller of Certifying Authorities (CCA) has been 
appointed by the Central Government under Section 
17 of the Information Technology Act (IT Act 2000) for 
purposes as defined in the Act. The Office of the CCA 
came into existence on November 1, 2000. Since then, 
the Office of CCA is executing its statutory functions 
under the administrative control of Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology. It aims at promoting the 
growth of E-Commerce and E-Governance through the 
wide use of digital signatures.
The Information Technology Act, 2000 facilitates the 
acceptance of Electronic Records and Electronic 
Signatures through a legal framework for establishing 
trust in digital transactions.
The Controller of Certifying Authorities (CCA) established 
the Root Certifying Authority of India (RCAI) under Section 
18(b) of the IT Act to digitally sign/certify the public keys 
of Certifying Authorities (CA) in the country. The RCAI is 
operated as per the standards laid down under the Act. 
The CCA certifies the public keys of CAs using its own 
private key, which enables users in cyberspace to verify 
that a given certificate is issued by a licensed CA. The 
IT Act provides for the Controller of Certifying Authorities 
(CCA) to license and regulate the working of Certifying 
Authorities. The Certifying Authorities (CAs) issue digital 
signature certificates for the electronic authentication of 
users in the cyber world.
8.1.2 Root Certifying Authority of India 
8.1.2.1	 Root CA
The model adopted by India is a hierarchical PKI with the 
trust chain starting from the Root Certifying Authority of 
India (RCAI). RCAI is operated by the CCA, Government 
of India. Below RCAI there are Certifying Authorities 
(CAs) licensed by CCA to issue Digital Signature 
Certificates under the IT Act
CCA
ABC CA
XYZ CAP
QR CA
End
User
End
User
JHL
Sub-CA
MNO
Sub-CA
End
User
End
User
Hierarchical structure of RCAI
The IT Act provides for the Controller of Certifying 
Authorities (CCA) to license and regulate the working of 
Certifying Authorities (CA). The following are some of the 
functions of CCA 
•	
Function as Root Certifying Authority of India 
•	
Certifying the public keys of the CAs. 
•	
Laying down the standards & Guidelines to be 
followed by the CAs, 
•	
Licensing 
Certifying 
Authorities 
(CAs) 
and 
exercising supervision over their activities. 
•	
Addressing the issues related to the licensing 
process 
• 
Approving the Certification Practice Statement 
(CPS)
•	
Auditing the physical and technical infrastructure 
of the applicants through a panel of auditors 
maintained by the CCA. 
• 
Resolving conflict of interest between CAs and 
subscribers 
Statutory Organisations
8

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Statutory Organisations
Annual
2024-2025
184
Overview of Technical Operations as Root CA
The Root Certificates of CCA is the trust anchor of all 
the CA certificates and DSCs issued by Licensed CAs. 
In the year 2022, two new self-signed Root certificates 
with a key-size of 4096 RA have been created. CCA 
India 2022 will be used for certifying the CA who issue 
end-entity digital signature certificates and CCA India 
2022 SPL will be used for certifying the CAs who issue 
Certificates. Twenty-three (23) CAs have been certified 
under CCA India 2022 Root Certificate. The enrollment 
of root certificates in Adobe and Microsoft products is in 
progress.
8.1.2.2 Certifying Authorities
CAs can be private sector companies, Government 
departments, 
public 
sector 
companies, 
or 
non-
governmental organizations (NGOs). These are also 
called Licensed CAs. At present, there are twenty-two 
CAs licensed by Root CA and all of them are operating 
under same policy, standards, and verification methods, 
subjected to be audited by the criteria set by Root CA. The 
policy IDs of certificates are also same for all CAs. CAs 
are required to provide CRL, OCSP and Timestamping 
Services. CAs are also not allowed to issue certificates 
other than that mentioned in the CPS which is approved 
by CCA. The certificates issued by Licensed CAs are 
legally valid in India. A Certifying Authority can create 
sub-CAs to meet the business branding requirement. 
These sub-CAs, which will be part of the same legal 
entity as the CA, will issue certificates to the end entities 
or subscribers. The CAs are allowed to create ONE level 
of sub-CA only. CA are required to operate under the 
provisions of Act, Rules, Regulations and orders issued 
by CCA. The orders issued by CCA are published in the 
form of Guidelines.
The license is issued for a period of 5 years. CAs are 
required to renew the license after the expiry of the 
license. The license is subject to suspension, revocation 
and renewal. The terms and conditions for the renewal 
are same as fresh license. The licence is issued based 
on eligibility criteria like net worth, paid-up capital and 
compliance to technical and physical infrastructure in 
accordance with the provision under Act.
CRL
CCA
Certificate
Directory
OCSP
Validation
Yes 
No
Validation 
request

Statutory Organisations
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
185
Overview of Technical Operations as Certifying 
Authorities
8.1.2.3 Electronic Signature Certificates
To obtain an Electronic Signature certificate from CA, 
the applicant needs to undergo a verification process as 
mentioned in the Identity Verification Guidelines (IVG) 
issued by CCA and upon successful verification. 
In order to issue Digital Signature Certificates (DSC), 
KYC of DSC applicants are carried out by CA. In the 
current scenario, the submission of DSC application and 
verification by CA are fully electronic. For KYC, the option 
available include online Aadhaar verification, Aadhaar 
offline eKYC, banking eKYC, organizational eKYC, PAN 
based eKYC or a direct verification. End user electronic 
signature certificates are strictly issued in a Hardware 
Crypto Token for a period of 1-3 years.
CA creates an eKYC account and issue an electronic 
Signature certificate to the applicant. As the verification 
process are online, the certificate can be obtained within 
2-3 hours. For all categories of applicants, email-id, 
mobile number, photo, scanned copy of proof of identity 
and scanned copy of proof of address are required to be 
submitted to CA. 
The total number of Digital Signature Certificates (DSC) 
issued in the country grew to more than 95.22 crore 
(out of which 89.87 crore DSCs are for eSign) by 31st 
December 2024 & continues to grow rapidly and is 
expected to increase significantly with the launch of 
various e-Governance/e-Commerce programmes.
Time stamping 
authority
Time stamping 
request
Validation 
request
Entity’s 
Certification 
request
Validation 
autherity
Certification 
authority
Certificate
Directory
OCSP
CRL
Yes 
No
×

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Statutory Organisations
Annual
2024-2025
186
Yearly Growth of Electronic Signature
8.1.2.4	 Time stamping
Time stamping The National Physical Laboratory, 
India (NPLI), is responsible for the maintenance and 
development of the Indian Standard Time (IST). NPLI 
maintains the time scale of Indian Standard Time (IST) 
with the help of a commercial cesium atomic clock. The 
time scale maintained by NPL is designated as UTC. CAs 
are required to derive time from national time source for 
their use in the issuance of electronic signature certificate 
and eSign Service. Also, the time included in the time-
stamp token shall be synchronized with Standard Time 
Source within the accuracy of ±1 second. CAs are 
providing time-stamping services in compliance with RFC 
3161. The timestamp token includes a representation 
(e.g. hash-value) of the datum being time-stamped as 
provided by the time stamp requestor/subscriber. The 
Guideline was also issued in this regard by CCA.
8.1.2.5	 OCSP & CRL
Digital certificates are used to create trust in online 
transactions. The usage of certificate-related functions 
is deemed as valid only if the certificate is valid at the 
time of usage. The validity of the certificate is determined 
through the Certificate Revocation List (CRL) or Online 
Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP). CA issues certificates 
with a validity period up to 3 years. Within the validity 
period, the certificate may be revoked by CA under certain 
circumstances. CA periodically issue the revocation 
list and publish it on the website of CA. Certifying 
Authorities publishes the Certificate Revocation List 
(CRL) in accordance with the provisions of Information 
Technology Act and Guidelines specified by the Office of 
CCA. Relying parties can verify revocation status of DSC 
in an offline mode, by periodically downloading CRLs or 
by accessing CRLs from the CAs website.
To provide more timely status information, all CAs provide 
an Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) service to 
enable relying-party application software to determine 
the status of an identified Certificate in an online mode. 
The CAs are required to operate their OCSP service 
as per the requirements specified under the Guidelines 
issued by CCA.
8.1.2.6	 eSign
eSign is an online Electronic Signature Service, based 
on successful authentication of individual using e-KYC 

Statutory Organisations
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
187
services, the key pairs generation, the certification of the 
public key based on authenticated response received 
from e-KYC services, and digital signature of the 
electronic document are facilitated by the eSign online 
Electronic Signature Service provider instantaneously 
within a single online service. The key-pairs are used 
only once and the private key is deleted after one time 
use. The Digital Signature Certificates are of 30-minute 
validity, and this makes verification simple by eliminating 
the requirements of revocation checking. Document that 
is signed using eSign will contain a valid digital signature 
that can be easily verified using standard methods. 
MeitY in consultation with UIDAI, approved the use of 
online Aadhaar authentication & eKYC for issuance 
of DSC as specified under Rule 4 of the Aadhaar 
Authentication for Good Governance (Social Welfare, 
Innovation, Knowledge) Rules, 2020. With this, the 
adoption of eSign service is rapidly increasing. 
8.1.3	 Electronic Signatures Policy Framework 
A pictorial representation and a brief description of 
policies applicable to CA, electronic Signature Certificate 
and Electronic Signature are given below:
Policy Framework
•	
In India PKI hierarchy, have two separate trust 
chains- one for one end-entity certificates and one 
for SSL. There are twenty-two Licensed CAs that 
are operating in different parts of the country.
•	
CAs are operating under single India PKI Policy. 
There is no separate policy for any of the licensed 
CA by RCAI.
• 
The verification requirements prior to issuance 
end-entity certificates are governed by Identity 
Verification Guidelines specified by Root CA. 
Licensed CAs are required to adhere to these 
Guidelines for issuance of any certificate.
• 
The certificate policy for India PKI covers the policy 
Id given to each class of certificates which are 
common across all CA and adhere to India PKI CP.
• 
To facilitate interoperability, Root CA has specified 
“DSC Interoperability Guidelines for issuance 
certificates under the Root Chain. A detailed 
specification for end entity and SSL certificates 
are covered under DSC 10 / 15 interoperability 
Guidelines specified by Root CA and the same is 
followed by each sub-CA.
Law and Standards
	 Information Technology Act
	 It Act Rules (Includes standards)
	 Regulations
Certificate Policy
 X.509 Certificate Policy for India PKI
	 OLD Hlerarchy for India PKI
Certificate Policy/Interoperability
	 Interoperability Guidelines for DSCs
Identity Verification
 Identity Verification Guidelines 
eSign Online Service
	 eSign e-authentication Guideline
	 eSign API
Licensing of CAs
	 CPS Framework
	 CA infrastructure Setup Requirements
INDIA PKI
Root CA
CAs
ESP
TS
OCSP
Subscribers
Relying Parties
	 CA Auditing Criteria
	 Auditors Empanelment
Auditing
Signature Profiles
 PKCSH7 and CMS signature profiles
 XML Signature Profiles
OCSP Services
	 OCSP Service Guidelines
SSL
	 SSL Guidelines
Time Stamping Service
	 Time Stamping Guidelines
Crypto Medium
	 Crypto Medium Storage Guidelines
Abbreviations
Certifying Authority (CA)
Time Stamping (TS)
Secure Socket Layer (SSL)
Relying Party (RP)
Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP)
eSign Service Provider (ESP)

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Statutory Organisations
Annual
2024-2025
188
•	
Under the provisions of IT Act Controller to license 
the Certifying Authorities and also to ensure that 
none of the provisions of the Act are violated. 
Audits are carried out to ensure the adherence to 
Information Technology Act 2000, the rules and 
regulations thereunder, and guidelines issued 
by the Controller from time-to-time. Auditing of 
the physical and technical infrastructure of CA is 
carried out through a panel of auditors by the CCA. 
The audit reports are submitted to Root CA directly 
by auditors. The criteria for the audit include 
WebTrust and CAB requirements.
•	
In order to establish a single national policy, Root 
CA has already laid down common CPS template 
for sub-CAs. Each CA will have their own CPS 
and have provided links to policy, procedure, and 
guidelines of Root CA. The CPS are available in 
the disclosure records of each CA published on the 
website of CCA.
In order to streamline the activities of Registration 
Authorities engaged by CAs, Office of CCA included 
the guidelines with respect to enrollment and operation 
of Registration Authorities in the Identity Verification 
Guidelines. Now the RAs are under ambit of audit and 
liable for action by CAs in the case of dishonest activities. 
8.1.4 Licence granted/renewed to operate as 
Certifying Authority
CCA grants a license to the organization to operate as 
a Certifying Authority and CA issues Digital Signature 
Certificates to end users. The progress in the licensing of 
Certifying Authorities is below:
8.1.5	 Services offered by Certifying Authorities
The licensed Certifying Authorities offer services to the 
public depending on their Organizational policy. A brief 
overview of the different services offered by the certifying 
authorities is in the table below:
Overview of Services Available with Licensed CAS
Licensed CAs
Class 1-3 
DSCs
eSign
SSL*
Time 
Stamping
1.
Safes crypt



2.
(n) code Solutions



3.
e-Mudhra




4.
Capricorn



5.
Vsign (Verasys)



6.
RISL (Raj Comp)




7.
ID Sign



8.
Pantasign



9.
Xtra Trust



10. Pro Digi Sign



11. SignX



12. Care 4 Sign



13. CDAC


14. Protean (NSDL e-GOV)


15. CSC


16. CDSL Ventrues
CDSL
CDSL
17. RPSL


18. IDRBT
Banks
Banks Banks
19. Indian Air Force
IAF
IAF
IAF
20. India Army
Army
Army
Army
21. Indian Navy
Navy
Navy
Navy
Navy
22. IGCAR
IGCAR
IGCAR
*The Root CA Certificate of India is listed only in Microsoft Products (Including IE)

Statutory Organisations
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
189
8.1.6	 Next Generation PKI for Smart Application
As part of its promotional role for boosting electronic 
transactions for e-Commerce and e-Sign application, 
the Office of CCA conducts awareness programmes. 
Training programs on Digital Signatures and Public Key 
Infrastructure are continuously being organized across 
the country for various target audience groups. These 
awareness programmes are conducted across the length 
and breadth of the country. CDAC, Bangalore has been 
identified as an awareness partner, through a grant-in-
aid project CDAC, Bangalore has conducted various 
awareness programs on behalf of CCA India.
A series of Digital Signature and Public Key Infrastructure 
events were organized from 5-6th September 2024 in 
Bangalore which included:
•	
5th International Conference on Public Key 
Infrastructure and its Applications (PKIA 2024) - 
A Joint Conference by IEEE CS & IAS Bangalore 
Chapter (5-6th September 2024)
•	
A Tech Expo was organized on 6th September 
2024. 
8.1.7	 Digital Locker Authority (DLA)
Under the Digital India Programme, Government of India 
has planned to provide shareable private space on a 
public cloud and to digitize all documents and records 
of the citizens and make them available on a real-time 
basis. These mechanisms of ‘e-Document repositories’ 
and ‘Digital Lockers’ will greatly improve citizen 
convenience and usher in paperless transactions across 
the entire ecosystem of public services. The framework 
for the Digital Locker Ecosystem has been set up by 
the Controller of Certifying Authorities (CCA) who has 
been given additional charge to function as ‘Controller of 
Digital Locker Authority (CDLA)’. 
A new digital locker service providers (DLSP) data 
exchange model has been proposed as the existing 
framework of Digital locker was having a dependency on 
Aadhaar and usage of same was restricted by the verdict 
given by Supreme Court of India. This new model allows 
each DLSP to be in conformity to the updated Aadhaar 
act and still be able to provide their users access to 
issuer data within the Digital Locker ecosystem. Each 
DLSP will be free to further add more documents from 
these issuers to their system, while also providing users 
access to documents available via MeitY DigiLocker 
system.
8.1.8	 Projects/assignments planned for execution 
undertaken by CCA
a)	
Development of PKI-based Digital Certificates for 
IoT Device Security
b)	
Common API Platform and method to fetch the 
number of digital signatures signed through DSC 
Token
c)	
Blockchain-based Digital Signature Certificate 
Validation and storage System with a Smart 
Dashboard
d)	
Implementation of ISO 27001 for WebTrust 
Compliance to  Root Certifying Authority of 
India (RCAI)
e)	
Secure Mobile based PKI solution
8.2	
Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI)
8.2.1	 Introduction
8.2.1.1 The Unique Identification Authority of India 
(UIDAI) was established to develop the policy, procedure 
and systems for issuing Aadhaar numbers to individuals 
and perform its authentication. 
8.2.1.2	 UIDAI was set up through a Government 
notification dated 28th January 2009 as an attached office 
of the then Planning Commission, to lay down plans 
and policies to implement the UID Scheme and to own, 
operate, update and maintain the UID database. The first 
Aadhaar number was issued on 29th September 2010. 
8.2.1.3	 Following the enactment and coming into force 
of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other 
Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 (“Aadhaar 
Act”), UIDAI was established through a notification 
dated 12th July 2016 of the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY) as a statutory authority 
under the Aadhaar Act.
8.2.2	 Relevance of Aadhaar number
8.2.2.1	 The inability to establish one’s identity has been 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Statutory Organisations
Annual
2024-2025
190
a major challenge for the poor and marginalised sections 
of society in accessing benefits, subsidies and services 
made available by the government. Given the large 
population of India, it was difficult to identify each and 
every individual. Further, with a multiplicity of agencies 
issuing different identity documents and government 
departments and agencies requiring different identity 
documents, every time an individual sought to avail of a 
subsidy, benefit or service, she or he had to undergo a 
fresh cycle of identity creation and/or verification, which 
typically entailed possession of some other documents. 
Such duplication of efforts and “identity silos” not only 
increased the overall cost of delivery of subsidies, 
benefits and services but was also not in the interest of 
furthering ease of living.
8.2.2.2	 Therefore, a need was felt to create a digital 
identity and, to this end, the Aadhaar Act was enacted. 
The Act provides for good governance, efficient, 
transparent and targeted delivery of subsidies, benefits 
and services, the expenditure for which is incurred from 
the Consolidated Fund of India, to individuals residing 
in India through assigning of unique identity numbers 
to such individuals and for connected and incidental 
matters. The objective was to harness the benefits of 
a unique identity for all residents, which would offer a 
means to detect any duplication of identity and which 
may be authenticated/verified in an easy, cost-effective 
manner. 
8.2.3	 Aadhaar Act
8.2.3.1	 The validity of the Aadhaar Act was upheld by 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in its judgement dated 26th 
September 2018 in Justice (Retd.) K. S. Puttaswamy and 
Anr; vs Union of India & Ors; with certain observations 
and directions. The directions of the Apex Court were 
given effect to through an amending Act that amended the 
Aadhaar Act, the Telegraph Act, 1885 and the Prevention 
of Money-Laundering Act, 2002. The provisions of the 
amending Act came into force on 25th July 2019. Salient 
features of the amended provisions of law are as follows:
(a)	
To provide for voluntary use of Aadhaar number, 
only with the informed consent of the Aadhaar 
number holder, by authentication or offline 
verification;
(b)	
To enable use of Aadhaar authentication by State 
Governments as well;
(c)	
To provide that services shall not be denied 
upon refusing to or being unable to undergo 
authentication;
(d)	
To provide for safeguards and restrictions on the 
performing of authentication;
(e) 
To lay down the procedure for offline verification;
(f)	
To confer power upon the Authority to give such 
directions as it may consider necessary to any 
entity in the Aadhaar ecosystem;
(g) 
To establish the Unique Identification Authority of 
India Fund;
(h)	
To provide for civil penalties, adjudication and 
appeal;
(i)	
To omit section 57 of Aadhaar Act, which permitted 
use of Aadhaar for any purpose, since the same 
had been struck down by the Apex Court; and
(j)	
To allow the use of Aadhaar number for 
authentication on voluntary basis as acceptable 
KYC document under the Telegraph Act, 1885 and 
the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002.
8.2.4	 Features of Aadhaar number
8.2.4.1	 Key features of Aadhaar number are as follows:
(a)	
It is a 12-digit random number, generated after 
a process of de-duplication using biometrics to 
ensure uniqueness of identity;
(b)	
It does not contain any intelligence and does not 
bear any relationship to the attributes or identity of 
an Aadhaar number holder;
(c)	
It is created and managed using scalable 
technology architecture;
(d)	
It operates using open-source technologies; and
(e)	
An individual is issued only one Aadhaar number.
8.2.5	 Enrolment 
8.2.5.1	 UIDAI has set up a nationwide infrastructure 
for Aadhaar enrolment in India through a network of 
Registrars and accredited enrolment agencies. The 
Registrars 
are 
largely 
Government 
departments, 
agencies and public sector banks. Enrolment agencies 

Statutory Organisations
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
191
are selected through rigorous selection criteria. An 
individual is enrolled by a UIDAI certified operator through 
UIDAI software under a highly robust, controlled, non-
repudiable and secure process. Individuals are enrolled 
for Aadhaar through certified operators, who are selected 
on the basis of a rigorous examination and test process. 
The operator authenticates every enrolment through 
her/his own fingerprints and Aadhaar number. In this 
manner, a complete account is maintained as to which 
operator enrolled whom, where and when, so that in case 
of any default, accountability of the enrolment operator 
and agency may be readily fixed. Thereafter, biometric 
data of enrolling persons are matched against the entire 
database of existing Aadhaar number holders, and only 
after checking that there is no match, an Aadhaar number 
generated. All enrolment data, including biometrics, are 
encrypted using a 2,048-bit encryption key at the time 
of the enrolment and are not accessible to any agency 
except UIDAI, which alone can access the data through 
a secure decryption key available only with UIDAI. 
8.2.5.2	 Enrolment for issuance of an Aadhaar number 
and update of identity information linked to Aadhaar 
number is enabled through the following (information is 
as on 31.12.2024):
(a)	
India Post – 7,809 permanent enrolment centres 
(PECs);
(b)	
Banks – 6,868 PECs;
(c) 
State Government office locations – 29,163 PECs;
(d)	
UIDAI –88 AadhaarSevaKendras (ASKs) in 72 
cities across 33 States and Union territories;
(e)	
CSC eGovernance Services India Limited – 840 
CSC ASKs (at State, district and block level); and
(f)	
India Post Payments Bank – 53,000 operators for 
mobile Aadhaar update and child enrolment servic-
es, offered using mobile Aadhaar enrolment kits.
8.2.5.3	 UIDAI has taken the following major initiatives 
for strengthening the Aadhaar enrolment ecosystem: 
(a)	
Document update: Considering that Aadhaar 
has emerged as the most widely accepted proof 
of identity and is being used to avail numerous 
services by the Aadhaar number holder, for which 
they are required to submit their Aadhaar number 
linked with latest and updated identity information 
details, and with a view to provide them a facility 
to revalidate their demographic information (name, 
gender, date/year of birth and address), UIDAI 
has developed a new feature called   ‘’document 
update’’, which can be accessed  online through 
UIDAI’s myAadhaar portal or by visiting any 
Aadhaar enrolment centre and submitting copies of 
supporting documents evidencing Proof of Identity 
(PoI) and Proof of Address (PoA). 
(b)	
Adult enrolment: To ensure the robustness of 
the enrolment process, enrolment of adults for 
issuance of fresh Aadhaar numbers is now done 
with verification by State Nodal Officers appointed 
by the State Government concerned, on a portal 
made available by UIDAI. In order to ensure proper 
monitoring of the enrolment and usage of Aadhaar 
the State Unique Identification Implementation 
Committees  under the chairpersonship of Chief 
Secretaries have been reconstituted and District 
Level Aadhaar Monitoring Committees have been 
constituted.
(c)	
Child enrolment: Pursuant to the recommendations 
of a committee constituted under the chairperson-
ship of the Registrar General of India, Aadhaar 
numbers of both parents are now being collected 
and biometric authentication of one parent or le-
gal guardian is being done at the time of enrolment 
of a newborn. Further, birth registration Aadhaar 
enrolment is being promoted across the country 
through issuance of Aadhaar enrolment kits to op-
erators in hospitals, with a view to ensure enrol-
ment of newborns at the hospital itself. Moreover, 
the enrolment of the biometrics of children upon 
attaining the age of five years and the update of 
biometrics upon attaining the age of 15 years is 
offered free of charge if such enrolment/update is 
done within two years of attaining such age.
(d)	
Resident Foreign nationals enrolment: Special 
provisions were created for enrolment of a Foreign 
national, where the validity of Aadhaar so generated 
shall be restricted to the validity of VISA period in 
India. In case of OCI card holders and Nepalese/
Bhutanese applicants the validity of Aadhaar shall 
be restricted to 10 years. The validity period and 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Statutory Organisations
Annual
2024-2025
192
the term ‘Foreigner enrolled as a resident’ shall 
be mentioned in the Aadhaar Letter/Aadhaar PVC 
Card issued for such Aadhaar number holders.
8.2.6	 Authentication 
8.2.6.1	 Aadhaar 
authentication 
is 
the 
process 
wherein Aadhaar number, along with other attributes 
(demographics/biometrics/OTP) is submitted to UIDAI’s 
Central Identities Data Repository (CIDR) for verification. 
The CIDR verifies whether the data submitted matches 
the data available in CIDR and responds with a “yes/no” 
or an e-KYC. 
8.2.6.2	 The purpose of authentication is to enable an 
Aadhaar number holder to establish her/his identity to 
the authentication requesting entity, for the purpose of 
getting any subsidy, benefit or service provided by or 
through such entity.
8.2.6.3	 Authentication requesting entities: All requesting 
entities are required to be registered with UIDAI before 
they may undertake authentication. Such a requesting 
entity is onboarded as an Authentication User Agency 
(AUA), enabling it to perform Yes/No authentication. In 
case it is to perform e-KYC authentication as well, it is 
also registered as an e-KYC User Agency (KUA). An 
AUA or KUA may, with the permission of UIDAI, appoint 
one or more entities as their sub-AUA or sub-KUA. All 
requesting entities are required to store Aadhaar numbers 
and any connected Aadhaar data in a separate, secure 
database/vault/system, called Aadhaar Data Vault.
8.2.6.4	 Authentication Service Agencies (ASAs): ASAs 
provide secure Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) 
connectivity between requesting entities and UIDAI’s 
CIDR.
8.2.6.5	 mAadhaar 
mobile 
application: 
UIDAI 
has 
developed the mAadhaar mobile app to enable Aadhaar 
number holders to download their e-Aadhaar from the 
Aadhaar database. It also provides a number of other 
facilities, such as ordering a PVC Aadhaar card, scanning 
of the secure QR code on an Aadhaar card / e-Aadhaar 
/ Aadhaar letter, download of paperless offline e-KYC in 
XML format, etc.
8.2.6.6	 Face 
authentication: 
Smartphone 
based 
face authentication, which uses artificial intelligence 
technology, has been introduced with effect from on 
15th October 2021. This offers a touchless biometric 
authentication alternative to fingerprint or iris based 
biometric authentication. As of 31st December 2024, 
64 entities in production have commenced using face 
authentication while 25 in pre-production. 
8.2.6.7	 As on 31st December 2024, there are 212 AUAs, 
including 208 KUAs, and 20 ASAs. 14,046.14 crore 
authentication transactions have been performed since 
inception, including 2,225.45 crore e-KYC transactions.
8.2.7	 Security measures 
8.2.7.1	 UIDAI uses advanced encryption technologies 
for protecting data in transmission and storage. 
UIDAI’s Information Security Management System is 
ISO 27001:2022-certified. Further, the CIDR has been 
declared as a protected system under Section 70 of 
the Information Technology Act, 2000 and the National 
Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre 
provides key security inputs on an ongoing basis to 
maintain its cyber security posture.
8.2.7.2 A leading global firm has been engaged to 
facilitate the creation of a framework for the Governance, 
Risk, Compliance and Performance of the Aadhaar 
ecosystem and oversight of the same for adherence 
to the framework, with a view to ensure a robust, 
comprehensive and secure environment. 
8.2.8	 Customer relationship management
8.2.8.1	 UIDAI has set up an Aadhaar Sampark Kendra 
as the central point of contact for resolution of queries 
and grievances of Aadhaar number holders, accessible 
through the toll-free number 1947 and the email address 
help@uidai.gov.in. The contact centre has a mechanism 
to log queries and grievances and provide Aadhaar 
number holders with a unique reference number for 
tracking till closure of the matter. It also offers support in 
major regional languages. 
8.2.8.2	 The customer relationship management system 
of UIDAI supports multiple channels, viz., phone calls, 
email, chatbot (Aadhaar Mitra), web portal, seven major 
social media channels, letters and walk-in as the means 
through which grievances may be registered, tracked 
and resolved.

CHAPTER
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
193
9.1	
Centre 
for 
Development 
of 
Advanced 
Computing (C-DAC)
C-DAC is a premier R&D organization under the Ministry 
of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY). 
The organization focuses on applied research, design 
& development and deployment of innovative IT and 
electronics solutions for various key sectors.
The 
core 
research 
and 
development 
areas 
of 
C-DAC include High Performance Computing (HPC), 
Quantum 
Computing, 
Artificial 
Intelligence 
(AI), 
Strategic Technology (Including Emergency / Disaster 
Management), Digital India RISC-V (DIR-V), Software 
Technology (Including Cloud & BOSS), e-Governance, 
Healthcare and Educational Technologies, Cyber Security 
and Cyber Forensics, Automotive Technology, Power 
Electronics and Renewable Energy, Communication 
Technology and Internet of Things (IoT). 
In the year 2024-25, C-DAC achieved notable progress 
in the areas of electronics and information technology 
through extensive research and development. The 
organization successfully created and implemented a 
range of solutions, while also establishing collaborations 
with renowned organizations at both national and 
international levels. Additionally, C-DAC played a major 
role in providing training opportunities and organizing 
various events, conferences, workshops, etc. 
Key technological achievements of C-DAC during the 
year in each of its focused areas are outlined below.
9.1.1 National Supercomputing Mission (NSM) 
Details are covered in Chapter 5.
9.1.2 National Level Initiatives
9.1.2.1 Digital India RISC-V Program (DIR-V)
As part of Digital India RISC-V (DIR-V) Program, C-DAC 
has successfully completed the design and development 
of the VEGA series of microprocessors including 
India’s first indigenous 64-bit multi-core RISC-V based 
Superscalar 
Out-of-order 
Processor. 
The 
VEGA 
series comprise of 32/64-bit Single/Dual/Quad Core 
Superscalar Out-of-Order high performance processor 
cores based on RISC-V Instruction Set Architecture 
along with a robust ecosystem. A new 32-bit processor 
variant AT1051 has been added to the portfolio during 
2024-25 and currently six processors are available in the 
VEGA series. The Processors are in soft IP form and 
are available for licensing for the development of custom 
SoCs. Currently the processor IPs have been licensed 
to three startups/academia. Licensing to three more 
organisations is under process.
The first VEGA microprocessor-based SoC chip 
‘THEJAS32’, a 32-bit Single core SoC has been 
successfully fabricated and available. Another SoC chip 
“THEJAS64”, a 64-bit Single core SoC chip has been 
fabricated at SCL, Chandigarh, packaged and testing 
is in progress. The design implementation and tape-out 
of the ‘DHRUV64’, 64-bit Dual core SoC ASIC to TSMC 
foundry has also been completed, devices fabricated 
and packaging is in progress. The ‘DHANUSH64’, 64-bit 
Quad core SoC variant is in development.
A series of fully indigenous “Make in India” development 
boards named “ARIES” have been built upon the 
RISC-V ISA-compliant VEGA Processor (THEJAS32 
SoC) comprising easy-to-use hardware and software 
for the development of embedded systems for a wide 
range of applications including Sensor fusion, System 
supervisors, Remote sensors, Small IoT devices, Toy 
and electronic education equipment, etc. The VEGA 
SDK provides a full ecosystem with numerous examples 
and support documentation.
Five more variants of ARIES development boards 
(ARIES V3, DOT, ALPHA, Nova and Eco) have been 
developed. Eight ARIES development boards with 
Attached Offices and 
Societies
9

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
194
THEJAS32 SoC ASIC are currently available. The 
ARIES development boards are made available through 
online (robu.in, amazon.in, vegprocessors.in) and direct 
channels. Around 850 boards have been sold. Around 
1000 members of academia and industry have been 
trained on VEGA processors as part of 18 workshops 
and hackathons conducted. 
9.1.2.2 Emergency Response Support System (ERSS)
NextGen Emergency Response Support System - 
112 (NG112)
Consequent to the success of Phase-1 of Emergency 
Response Support System (ERSS-112), MHA has 
awarded ERSS Phase-2 (NextGen ERSS-112) also 
to C-DAC. The responsibilities include modernization 
of ERSS-112 with strengthened infrastructure and 
incorporation of intelligent features in the solution. 
NG112 solution is enriched with intelligent and innovative 
features to perform operations in a better manner on the 
strengthened infrastructure. Currently, NG112 is in the 
final stages of its deployment phase and eleven States/
UTs have already migrated to the new system. 
9.1.2.3 Other helplines integrated to ERSS – CHL, 
WHL & DHL
In addition to ERSS 112, C-DAC is the TSP for other 
helpline services such as the Child Helpline-1098 (CHL) 
and Women Helpline-181(WHL) of Ministry of Women & 
Child Development (MoWCD), Govt. of India. Currently, 
system developed by C-DAC for CHL is successfully 
running in all the States/UTs with 670+ districts across the 
country. Similarly, WHL is installed and running in 440+ 
districts. The implementation of Hub for Empowering 
Women (HEW), which is integrated with WHL is installed 
and running successfully in 19 districts of Bihar. C-DAC 
is also the solution provider for disaster helplines of 
National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) and 
various State Disaster Management Authorities (SDMA). 
A dedicated control room deployed with C-DAC’s software 
solution for Disaster Helpline (DHL) was setup by C-DAC 
for SDMA of Himachal Pradesh and the system is now 
running successfully since July 2024. All these helplines 
– CHL, WHL and DHL are tightly integrated to the ERSS 
112 system via APIs facilitating two-way data and voice 
communication. 
9.1.2.4 National Mission on Power Electronics 
Technology (NaMPET-III)
NaMPET is a National level R&D Programme which 
facilitated Research, Development, Deployment, and 
Commercialization of Power Electronics Technology. As 
a part of the same, Advanced technology/ products are 
developed/deployed in field (1.5kW wireless charger, 
WBG material-based Magnetometer, MEMS sensors for 
torque/ vibration, Planar Magnetics, (50Hz) Transformer-
less Dual mode Power Conditioner for Microgrid, AC 
& DC fast Charger for EV, LVDC power distribution 
in houseboat, Integrated drive for BLDC, Model EV 
charging station, AMI Pilot deployment, etc.) 
Under the NaMPET-Phase-III programme, following are 
the activities undertaken by C-DAC during the period. 
• 
Wireless charger at 1.5kW for 15cm is developed 
by VNIT Nagpur and C-DAC
• 
VCU Toolkit licensed and commissioned at 
Royapuram Locoshed. VCU tool kit is for testing 
the subsystem PCBs (8Nos) in VCU. It is being 
used by ToT partners and also by Locosheds. 
More EoIs are in process from other locosheds. 
• 
Smart meter evaluation toolkit licensed for 
evaluating the meters as part of Smart meter 
tendering in KSEBL Ltd, Kerala Along with Smart 
meter technology, A comprehensive test platform 
also is developed for meter testing (protocol as 
well as parameter level) by C-DAC and CPRI. 
• 
M/s Prochip technologies (Startup) has developed 
RF interface for C-DAC smart meter system under 
Startup promotion program of NaMPET. With this 
development C-DAC smart meter technology is 
having Cellular, RF and WIFI interfaces. RF is 
mainly for secured environments like MIL camps, 
etc. 
• 
Phasor measurement Unit (PMU) Technology 
for Power Distribution sector is developed and 
implemented in 3 locations in KSEBL distribution 
network. The technology is developed in technical 
association with IISc, Bangalore
• 
3 Phase loco propulsion technology development 
program for Indian Railways will be initiated shortly.

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
195
9.1.2.5	 Chips to Startup (C2S)
C-DAC is Programme Coordination Institution for overall 
implementation of Chips to Startup (C2S) Programme. 
100 Institutes, 13 Startups /MSMEs have been selected 
for financial support based on Call-For-Proposals. Vari-
ous FPGA boards identified and recommended by the 
CEPC were procured and distributed to all participating 
institutes under C2S Programme. 200+ organizations are 
supported for the EDA tools including institutes supported 
for funds. Currently Synopsys, Cadence, Siemens-EDA, 
Ansys and Keysight EDA Tool Licenses under C2S Pro-
gramme are successfully installed and hosted at ChipIN 
Centre, C-DAC Bengaluru for all participating institutions 
under C2S Programme. A total of over 120 EDA tool 
technical training sessions have been organized for all 
participating institutions so far. 
9.1.2.6	 Design Linked Incentive (DLI)
The Design Linked Incentive (DLI) Scheme shall offer 
financial incentives as well as design infrastructure 
support across various stages of development and 
deployment of semiconductor design for Integrated 
Circuits (ICs), Chipsets, System on Chips (SoCs), 
Systems & IP Cores and semiconductor linked design 
over a period of 5 years. As on January 01, 2025, total 
of 190 applications are received, 89 are under scrutiny 
(Financial & Technical) and, 17 are approved under 
PDLI funding, and 50 are approved under for EDA 
tool support. There are 98 indigenous start-ups and 
73 MSME applicants. Total cost of approved financial 
incentive under DLI is Rs. 203.22 Cr. and Rs. 22.16 Cr 
had already been disbursed to Startup and MSME based 
on the achieved project milestones.
9.1.3	 Quantum Computing
9.1.3.1 Metro Area Quantum Access Network 
(MAQAN)
MAQAN is India’s first Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) 
network and R&D testbed, marking a significant step 
towards quantum-safe communication. The project led 
to the indigenous development of a QKD chassis with 
control electronics for CoW and DPS protocols, alongside 
a hardware and software-based key distillation engine. A 
softcore Post Quantum Cryptography (PQC) mechanism 
was implemented as a fail-safe, and SDN-enabled 
QKD network management was achieved through the 
DARPAN-Q application. Additionally, a QKD network 
simulator and chassis emulator with integrated Optical 
Time Domain Reflectometer (OTDR) monitoring were 
also developed. This initiative resulted in an indigenous 
quantum-safe security solution for critical communication 
infrastructure and enhanced domestic capability in 
quantum technology. The network is currently operational 
in a 5-node topology. The project was a collaborative 
effort of IITM, SETS India, ERNET and C-DAC. The 
project has translated into the next phase project titled 
“Quantum Internet with Local Access” under the National 
Quantum Mission focussing on long distance fiber based 
QKD over 2000 km across India. 
MAQAN Network
9.1.3.2	 QSim - Quantum Computer Simulator Toolkit
The Quantum Computing Toolkit Project significantly 
advanced India’s quantum computing research as one of 
the country’s pioneering initiatives. Developed through a 
collaborative effort involving IISc Bengaluru, IIT-Roorkee, 
and C-DAC, the project led to the launch of QSim by Shri 
Rajeev Chandrasekhar, then Hon’ble Minister of State 
for Electronics & IT. It provided a robust, indigenous 
toolkit for simulating and experimenting with quantum 
circuits, including noisy circuits, and delivered hands-
on training to students, researchers, and scientists. This 
effort has cultivated an expansive user network, boasting 
over 6,800+ registered users on QSim (qctoolkit.in) from 
leading academic institutes and organizations like IITs, 
DRDO, IISER, TCS, Infosys, and IBM. Various training 
and workshops are conducted using QSim platform. 
Additionally, QSim is optimized for accelerator platforms 
like GPUs, enhancing performance and enabling faster 
simulations. 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
196
9.1.3.3	 Quantum Network Simulator
Quantum Network Simulator (QNS) is a software 
framework designed to simulate and model quantum 
networks up to the application layer, contributing 
towards the realization of the Quantum Internet. It allows 
users to study the performance of various quantum 
network protocols, topologies, and configurations. Key 
features of the QNS include support for built-in quantum 
communication protocols like teleportation, QKD, and 
super-dense coding; flexible parameter exploration for 
experiments; simulation of noisy quantum channels and 
network synchronization; and modelling of quantum 
entanglement processes. 
9.1.3.4 Centre of Excellence in Quantum Technology
The project achieved significant milestones in indigenous 
quantum technology development, including the creation 
of a 4-qubit Superconducting Quantum Processing 
Unit (QPU at IISc) , FPGA-based control measurement 
hardware at C-DAC/IISc and Photonics Quantum 
Processor ecosystem development. Key breakthroughs 
included QKD demonstrations in higher dimensions, 
a Free-space QKD protocol for qudit-based systems, 
semi-device independent Quantum Random Number 
Generation (QRNG) development, and the creation of a 
magnetometer operating in the femto-Tesla regime using 
spin noise spectroscopy. The project was executed 
collaboratively by IISc, Raman Research Institute (RRI) 
& C-DAC.
9.1.3.5 Development of Secure Post Quantum Public 
Key Infrastructure
C-DAC is leading a MeitY funded project “Development 
of Secure Post Quantum Public Key Infrastructure”. The 
project brings multidisciplinary expertise of prestigious 
institutions such as C-DAC Bengaluru, C-DAC Noida, IIT 
Madras, SETS Chennai and IIITD Kurnool. The objective 
of project is to develop Post Quantum Crypto Token by 
implementing CRYSTALS-Dilithium (for Digital Signature 
Scheme) and CRYSTALS-Kyber (for Key Encapsulation 
Mechanism) algorithms. These algorithms have been 
chosen by the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST) as winners in the competition for 
PQC Schemes. 
9.1.3.6 Agile and Ad-hoc Free Space based Quantum 
Communication using Drone (Drone-QC)
As part of the project, C-DAC has successfully demon-
strated an in-house Quantum Random Number Genera-
tor (QRNG) to a delegation from the National Payments 
Corporation of India (NPCI). The QRNG, which oper-
ates on the principle of path branching, was showcased 
alongside a secure data transfer system utilizing QRNG-
seeded Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC) in collabora-
tion with the e-Sign team. During the demonstration, a 
message encrypted using PQC, with the key seeded by 
the QRNG in the Quantum lab, was securely transmitted 
via a web service to the meeting venue, where it was 
decrypted and displayed. This innovative technology uti-
lizes quantum superposition, where a system exists in 
multiple states simultaneously until measured, causing a 
random collapse per the Born rule. 
9.1.4 Strategic Electronics
C-DAC has developed various systems of strategic 
importance to the nation’s Defense, Space and Atomic 
Energy programs with highest level of reliability and 
performance. The following are the key activities 
undertaken by C-DAC in Strategic Electronics.
• 
C-DAC developed Advanced System for Solid 
Propellant Burn Rate Measurement facility was 
jointly inaugurated by Chairman, DRDO, Dr. Samir 
V Kamat and DG, C-DAC, Shri. E. Magesh at High 
Energy Materials Research Laboratory (HEMRL), 
DRDO, Pune in March, 2024. Accurate burn rate 
measurement is critical for precisely predicting the 
trajectory of rockets and missiles. This new system 
represents a significant advancement in the field.
• 
C-DAC developed, CEMILAC-certified indigenous 
engine controller is installed in Chetak helicopters 
operated by the Indian Army, Navy, and Air Force. 
These helicopters are being operating successfully 
in various weather conditions throughout the 
nation. This accomplishment led to collaborative 
projects with HAL for Dornier & Jaguar aircrafts 
and Heron UAVs. 
• 
C-DAC designed and developed MIL-qualified 
simulators of the Navigational Suite for the Indian 
Navy as part of the Integrated Combat Suite project 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
197
for submarines through DRDO labs Research 
Center Imarat (RCI) and NPOL.
• 
C-DAC has designed, developed and successfully 
installed 
Digital 
Electromagnetic 
Transducer 
for Naval ships. This would result in realization 
of compact, low cost and high-performance 
Electromagnetic Log system for Naval ships.
• 
C-DAC developed NDT system (SoUNDS Mk2R5) 
delivered to L & T Defence. This is the first ever 
delivery of the system to a private firm.
• 
C-DAC 
developed 
Vessel 
Tracking 
System 
(VETRA)-Neo for the Indian Navy and delivered to 
Underwater Ranges (UWR), Goa in January 2024. 
VETRA-Neo is an advanced DGPS positioning 
system equipped with a multi-frequency GNSS 
receiver and multi-rover radio telemetry, capable 
of providing centimetre-level accuracy to marine 
vessels enabling accurate navigation.
• 
C-DAC expedition team successfully completed the 
bathymetry survey of two glacial lakes, 4800 meter 
ASL in Himachal Pradesh braving hard trekking and 
climatic conditions, using indigenously developed 
Autonomous Bathymetric Survey Vessel.
• 
MoU signed between NDMA and C-DAC for 
Design, 
Development 
and 
Deployment 
of 
Indigenous GLOF-EWS for Uttarakhand, Sikkim, 
Arunachal Pradesh, HP and Union Territories -J&K 
and Ladakh.
• 
Installation and commissioning of USBRMS at 
SFC, DRDO, Jagdalpur, Chhattisgarh has been 
carried out in September 2024. Received Letter 
of Appreciation and 100% Customer Satisfaction 
Index rating from SFC, DRDO, Jagdalpur for the 
project USBRMS.
• 
Navigational equipment Submarine Echosounder 
designed and developed by C-DAC is fitted to two 
submarines of Indian Navy – INS Sindhusasthra & 
INS Sindhukirti.
9.1.4.1 Intelligent Transportation Systems
C-DAC as a Nodal centre in collaboration with 
IIT Bombay, IIT Madras, and IISc Bengaluru has 
completed 
Collaborative 
Intelligent 
Transportation 
Systems Endeavor for Indian cities (InTranSE Phase II) 
programme funded by MeitY, resulting in the realization 
of a following hardware and software products. 
• 
On-board Driver Assistance and Warning System 
(ODAWS) 
• 
Bus Priority System (BPS) 
• 
A mobile app-based Departure Time Traveler
• 
A mobile app-based Personalized Transit Route 
Guidance System (PRTGS) 
• 
A web-based app for Operational Strategy to 
Headway Reliability for Public Transport Buses 
(OSHR)
• 
CMOS-based Industrial Smart Camera
• 
Industrial 10GigE CMOS Camera
• 
Online Sucro Crystal and Imaging System
• 
Thermal smart camera with road traffic application
• 
Development of Common Service Layer based on 
Global standard for ITS (CoSMiC)
• 
Desktop-based driving simulator integrated with a 
general-purpose traffic simulator
During the launch event of “ Digital India FutureLABS 
Summit 2024” held at IIIT- Delhi, the signing of TOT for 
Thermal camera were done with RRPS4E Innovation 
Pvt Ltd, SCITA Solutions, TAK Technologies Pvt Ltd, 
AABMATICA Technologies, Prama India Pvt Ltd, 
Samriddhi Automations Pvt Ltd, Norden Research and 
Innovation Centre and Vehant Technologies Pvt Ltd. The 
ToT signing of CMOS SMART camera was done with 
Spookfish Technologies Pvt Ltd. 
Fleet Management System for live tracking and Flexible 
Operations (FlexiFleet), Personalized Transit Route 
Guidance System (PTRGS) & Operational Strategies for 
Headway Reliability (OSHR) technology was transferred 
to M/s. IBI Group India Private Limited, M/s. Atulya 
Abhinav Tech Private Limited, M/s. Unidad Techno 
Labs(P) Ltd and M/s. UL Technology Solutions Pvt. Ltd.
The state-wide rollout of the Vehicle Tracking and Fleet 
Management System for SUPPLYCO [VTFMS] has been 
completed, facilitating the monitoring of feet movements 
for the transportation of food grains from warehouses to 
ration shops across Kerala. A total of 944 vehicles have 
been enrolled in the system.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
198
9.1.5 Agri Electronics
9.1.5.1 The National Program on Agriculture and 
Environment Electronics (AgriEnIcs)
The multi-institutional R&D program, AgriEnICS, support-
ed by MeitY, Government of India has been successfully 
completed. Presently the project team is actively pursu-
ing the commercialization of developed products. This 
program has been executed by C-DAC Kolkata Centre 
in collaboration with multiple Collaborators and Industry/
start-ups. Sectors like agriculture, livestock management 
and environment were covered, and product prototypes 
were developed. Technology transfer of the Air Quality 
Monitoring Device (AI-AQMS) has been done and the 
ToT partner has already started marketing and selling 
the products. Technologies like Cattle health monitoring 
device (GoP), Mastitis disease detector in milk (MAST 
D), Multi-grain quality analyser (GrainEX), Chilly qual-
ity analyser (CT VIEU), and Smart poultry management 
and Chick gender identifier (GEMS) are already ready for 
commercialization. The Robotic apple harvester device 
also showed potential for commercialization after proper 
tuning. Also, the tomato sorting and grading machine 
(eQuality-Veg) is under lab trial.
9.1.5.2 ColoSENS
C-DAC Kolkata has developed a product, namely, 
“ColOSENS” - a Bio-Sensing system to diagnose 
bacterial diarrhoea, under a MeitY funded project, titled, 
“An Affordable Colorimetric Diagnostic Instrument: 
ColOSENS And Field Validation at Imphal, North-East 
India”. The device is a battery-operated field portable 
biosensing system equipped with DNA aptamer-based 
receptor towards rapid screening of bacterial diarrhoea. 
This rapid tool would help the Physicians to treat 
diarrhoea patients, particularly children, in a proper 
way. The agreement for the transfer-of-technology of 
Colosens is ready and formal signing is expected soon. 
9.1.6 Solutions for Smart Cities
9.1.6.1 Delhi Safe City Project
The Safe City initiative, launched under the vision of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), Government of India, 
continues to make significant strides towards enhancing 
public safety, especially in relation to women’s safety, 
through CCTV surveillance and advanced technological 
infrastructure. The following activities are carried out 
during the period. All the command-and-control centers 
at various levels, including the Police Headquarters 
(C4i), district levels (C3is), and police stations (C2is), 
are ready and few of the C3is were pivotal in managing 
significant events including G20, Independence Day and 
Republic Day celebrations. The Data Center is ready 
and functional. The installation of surveillance cameras 
has progressed significantly and 4396 cameras have 
been successfully integrated into the Video Management 
System (VMS). The testing & evaluation of the software 
components, inspection of field locations are in progress.
9.1.7 Language Computing and Heritage Computing
9.1.7.1 Speech Technologies for Northeastern 
Language (STNEL)
C-DAC, in collaboration with IIT Madras, IIT Guwahati, 
NIT Manipur, and IIIT Siri City, is working on speech 
technologies for Northeastern languages, which is a 
sub-project under the consortium-based umbrella project 
“Speech Technologies in Indian languages” under 
NLTM. As part of the activity, C-DAC is working on the 
task of data collection in the Nepali language, curation 
of datasets in the Bengali language, and development 
of KWS systems in these languages with application to 
speech-based Healthcare Information Dissemination. 
C-DAC in collaboration with other consortium members, 
developed a baseline end-to-end keyword recognition 
system for Bengali, Mizo, and Manipuri Languages.
9.1.7.2 Scalable Speaker Recognition Technology in 
Different Applications 
C-DAC, in collaboration with IIT Madras, IIT Dharwad, 
IIIT Dharwad, NIT Patna, NIT Manipur, KLE Tech 
University, and KL University, is working on “Development 
and Deployment of Scalable Speaker Recognition 
Technology in Different Applications” as a sub-project 
under the consortium-based umbrella project “Speech 
Technologies in Indian languages” under NLTM. As 
a part of this activity, C-DAC is working on the task of 
Forensic Speaker Recognition with development of 
related data(speech) resources and baseline systems. 
The speaker recognition system has already been 
shared with the BHASHINI team for further deployment.

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
199
9.1.7.3 Speech Based Examination System
A Speech-based Examination System for visually 
challenged students has been developed by C-DAC. 
Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) and Text-to-
Speech Synthesis (TTS) technologies are used as the 
core in this system. The system interacts with students in 
speech form, takes answers in speech form, and converts 
the same into text using ASR. The primary objective 
is to remove the dependency on human scribes. The 
system works for subjective as well as objective types 
of questions and currently supports English and major 
Indian languages. Project is developed under Bhashini. 
One college in Thane, Maharashtra adopted this system, 
and a visually challenged student wrote all 7 papers of 
his second-year graduation examination using the same. 
9.1.7.4 Kanthasth 3.0 Bahubhashi Hkkjrh; Hkk"kkvksa dk 
vuqokn lkjFkh
On the occasion of Hindi Diwas Samaroh-2024 & 4th 
Akhil Bhartiya Rajbhasha Sammelan held at New Delhi 
on 14-15 September 2024, Union Home Minister and 
Minister of Cooperation Shri Amit Shah had launched 
Bharatiya Bhasha Anubhag. Keeping in view the intent 
of the Constitution and the Prime Minister’s direction, to 
promote the use of Indian languages ​along with Hindi 
and establish better coordination between them, the 
Department of Official Language, MHA have established 
Bharatiya Bhasha Anubhag in association with C-DAC to 
develop a multifaceted translation system of Kanthasth 
Bahubhashi for 16 Indian constitutional Languages. A 
Translation Memory & NMT-based translation system 
for 15 scheduled official languages (Assamese, 
Bengali, Gujarati, English, Kannada, Kashmiri, Konkani, 
Malayalam, Manipuri, Marathi, Odia, Punjabi, Tamil, 
Telugu and Urdu)
Kanthasth-Rajbhasha 
2.0 
Customization 
and 
Deployment: Kanthasth 2.0 is a software-aided 
translation system that helps in the translation from 
English to Hindi and vice versa which has been developed 
by C-DAC, Pune. The same has been customized and 
deployed for for various Government department for 
LAN access to maintain the security and privacy. It is 
deployed on the intranet of DRDO, ICG, and SEBI.
 
 
9.1.7.5 HIMANGY (HIndustani Machini ANuvaad 
TechnoloGY):
Under the National Language Translation Mission 
(NLTM) ‘BHASHINI’, C-DAC is working on a consortium-
based project aimed at developing and deploying a 
bidirectional machine translation system between Indian 
languages to Indian languages which includes Punjabi, 
Telugu, Urdu, Gujarati, Kannada, Odia, Kashmiri, Sindhi, 
and Dogri. The project focuses on creating resources and 
offering machine translation services, primarily targeting 
the domains of Governance & Policy and Health. The 
consortium is involved in generating linguistic resources, 
establishing benchmark data for each language pair, 
defining evaluation standards, building corpora, and 
implementing the machine translation system for all 
stakeholders. C-DAC is responsible for Punjabi, Dogri 
and Odia for the aforementioned tasks. So far, C-DAC 
has created high-quality parallel corpus of 100000 for 
Hindi-Punjabi pairs and 60000 each for Hindi-Dogri and 
Hindi-Odia pairs. 
9.1.7.6 
VIDYAAPATI: 
A 
Bidirectional 
Machine 
Translation system for Bengali, Konkani, Maithili, 
Marathi, and Hindi
Under National Language Translation Mission (NLTM) 
‘BHASHINI’, C-DAC is working on a Machine Translation 
project, Vidyaapati: A Bidirectional Machine Translation 
System involving Bengali, Konkani, Maithili, Marathi, 
and Hindi using the Neural Machine Translation (NMT) 
framework. It aims to create linguistic resources in the 
domain of Admin, Law, Education and Tourism, Health 
etc., establishing benchmark data, defining evaluation 
standards, creating corpora, and implementation of 
Machine Translation (MT) system for all stakeholders 
involved. For Hindi-Bengali and vice versa pair of around 
20000 corpora has been translated along with Named 
Entity tagging of 3000 Bengali sentences. For Hindi-

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
200
Marathi and vice versa pair around 9000 corpora have 
been translated along with evaluation of approx. 2000 
DMU sentences from various domains.
9.1.7.7 English to Indian Language & Vice Versa 
Machine Translation system [English to Hindi, 
Marathi, Gujarati, Odia, Kannada & Malayalam 
Languages]
Under National Language Translation Mission (NLTM) 
‘BHASHINI’; a consortia-based project with aim to develop 
and deploy a Machine translation system as a service 
from English to Hindi, Marathi, Gujarati, Odia, Kannada, 
and Malayalam languages and vice versa. Creation of 
resources and development of Machine Translation 
System as a service Domain would be Governance and 
Policy (Primary), Science and Technology & Education, 
Health, & Agriculture. The task includes generating 
linguistic resources, establishing benchmark data for 
each language pair, defining evaluation standards, 
creating corpora, and implementing the Machine 
Translation (MT) system for all stakeholders involved. 
As of now, nearly 35,600 English-Hindi sentences, 32500 
sentences in English-Marathi, 27000 English-Kannada 
sentences, 10430 English-Malayalam, 12500 English-
Odia sentences have been translated. 5500 from Hindi-
English and 26000 from Kannada to English sentences 
has also been translated. 
9.1.7.8 Design, Development & Deployment of 
UA Knowledge Dissemination Portal for UA & 
Multilingual Internet
On March 21, 2024, India’s tech community marked a 
significant step towards a multilingual internet with the 
launch of the Bhashanet portal. This event coincided with 
India’s celebration of Universal Acceptance (UA) Day, 
which focuses on ensuring all languages and scripts are 
supported by internet infrastructure.
The Bhashanet portal was officially inaugurated by 
the Secretary of MeitY, Shri. S. Krishnan. The launch 
ceremony was graced by prominent figures like Dr. 
Devesh Tyagi (CEO of NIXI), Shri Sushil Pal (Joint 
Secretary at MeitY), Prof. Rajat Moona (IIT Gandhinagar), 
and Shri. Samiran Gupta (VP of APAC & Stakeholder 
Engagement for South Asia). The event brought together 
dignitaries from NIXI, industry experts, and various 
stakeholders invested in the initiative.
9.1.7.9 Sign Language Accessibility for e-Governance 
Services
The project titled “Sign Language Accessibility for 
e-Governance Services” is completed in August 2024. 
This was executed by C-DAC in collaboration with 
Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Kollam which aimed at 
providing accessibility of e-Governance services to hard 
of hearing, with use case of UMANG which provides 
numerous services of various government departments 
on single platform.
9.1.8 Health Informatics
9.1.8.1 Telemedicine Solutions
9.1.8.1.1 eSanjeevani 
eSanjeevani - National Telemedicine Service is an 
innovative, indigenous, cost-effective, microservices 
based 
telemedicine 
system 
developed 
and 
operationalized by C-DAC for the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare, Govt of India. It is implemented in 
two variants: 1. eSanjeevani-AAM Ayushman Arogya 
Mandirs (a provider-to-provider telemedicine platform): 
It enables the access of quality and specialized health 
services to rural and isolated populace in assisted mode. 
2. eSanjeevaniOPD (a patient to provider telemedicine 
platform): it empowers citizens to access health services 
in the confines of their homes through smartphones or 
laptops etc.
From 1st January 2024 to 30th December 2024, the 
eSanjeevani service has successfully catered to 135.88 
million patients. It operates at 124,519 Health and 
Wellness Centres (HWCs) as spokes, supported by 
15,796 hubs and 344 online OPD services. Over 34,259 
practitioners, including doctors, medical specialists, 
super-specialists, and healthcare workers, have utilized 
the platform during this period.
Recognizing 
the 
scalability 
and 
robustness 
of 
eSanjeevani, MeitY, Government of India, has positioned 
it as part of the India Stack, offering it to the global 
community as a model for telemedicine. Furthermore, it 
is anticipated that the platform will achieve an additional 
25 million consultations by March 2025, underscoring its 
continued growth and impact in transforming healthcare 
delivery.

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
201
9.1.8.1.2 Mercury™ Nimbus Neo Suite
Mercury™ Nimbus Neo Suite is a 5G and cloud-enabled 
Telehealth solution offering Telemedicine, TeleICU, 
EMR/EHR-centric teleconsultation. The solution is 
analyzed using in-house developed 5G simulation 
environments and CEWiT, IIT Madras 5G testbed. The 
TeleICU / Telemedicine services are setup and continued 
for Odhisha state, NTPC Ltd. and Jammu division using 
Mercury™ Nimbus Solution.
Recently, Odhisha Telemedicine network has extended 
with addition of 08 medical colleges and 01 district hospital 
using Mercury Nimbus Neo Suite. These new sites are 
established and ready for telemedicine activities. In the 
NTPC Telemedicine network, 17 remote NTPC sites are 
connected with 02 speciality centers benefiting NTPC 
employees and their families. Mercury™ solution is also 
deployed at Jammu division Data Centre for Tele ICU 
services at Govt. SMGS Hospital, Jammu. 
9.1.8.2 Healthcare Solutions
9.1.8.2.1 e-Upkaran 
e-Upkaran is a full-fledged equipment maintenance and 
management system to manage medical equipment life 
cycle of the equipments deployed in the health facilities 
across the States. e-Upkaran will help to improve, 
monitor, speed up process related to purchase of 
equipment, equipment complaint management and its 
usage and help in better decision making in purchase, 
effective utilization of existing and purchased equipment 
which help state in providing better health services to 
the citizen of state. e-Upkaran deployment tally has 
increased to 13 Instances in India covering 12 States 
and 01 Union Territory.
9.1.8.2.2 e-Aushadhi 
e-Aushadhi is a major step towards adapting technology 
to improve distribution of drugs, vaccines and sutures by 
leveraging computing power at low cost. The main aim of 
e-Aushadhi-DVDMS is to ascertain the pharmaceutical 
needs of various district drug warehouses such that all 
the required materials/drugs are constantly available to 
be supplied to the user district drug warehouses without 
delay and finally issuing drugs to the patients, who is 
the final consumer in the chain. Currently, 18 States, 06 
UTs, 05 Central Programs, 01 Program under Ministry 
of Defence and 02 Programs under Insurance Medical 
Services (Andhra Pradesh and Telangana) are using this 
application. 
9.1.8.2.3 e-RaktKosh
e-RaktKosh is a comprehensive IT solution to connect, 
digitize and streamline the workflow of blood banks. It 
has 3500+ blood banks on board throughout 36 states 
and UTs in the country. e-RaktKosh Portal is extensively 
used by the citizens for requirements related to blood, 
blood banks’ location identification, blood stock enquiry, 
maintenance of donation repository etc. e-RaktKosh is 
integrated with various state-wide blood bank solutions 
& has become a single data repository for management 
of data regarding blood, blood-related products, blood 
donation camps, donor repository etc. e-RaktKosh has 
been integrated with State Portals / HMIS, PayTM, 
Arogya Setu, etc. It is also integrated with Govt. of India 
e-Pramaan & e-Prayaas to provide the single sign-on 
facility. 
9.1.8.2.4 e-Sushrut 
e-Sushrut 
HMIS 
incorporates 
an 
integrated 
computerized clinical information system for improved 
Hospital administration and patient health care record 
Management. It provides an accurate, electronically 
stored medical record of the patient. The real-time 
e-Sushrut streamlines the treatment flow of patients and 
simultaneously empowers workforce to perform to their 
peak ability, in an optimized and efficient manner. 
e-Sushrut HMIS is being rolled out in 10 States, Indian 
Railway Hospitals, 16 AIIMS, SAIL, NHPC, NIMS 
Hyderabad, IGIMS Patna, PGIMER Chandigarh and 
CGHS. At present, e-Sushrut HMIS is being rolled out in 
more than 4000 Health Facilities in India with e-Sushrut 
Railway HMIS generating approximately 2 Crores 
e-Prescription. 
9.1.8.2.5 
Integrated 
Pharmaceuticals 
Database 
Management System (IPDMS2.0)
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) is 
under Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP), Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers as an independent Regulator for 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
202
pricing of drugs and to ensure availability and accessibility 
of medicines at affordable prices. 
C-DAC has developed IPDMS2.0 a web-based integrat-
ed application along with Pharma-Sahi -Dam Mobile App 
for NPPA’s to stream line pharmaceutical pricing regula-
tion in India. The System automates and improve consol-
idation of information and reduces analysis time for Pric-
ing and Overcharging. NPPA collects information from 
State Units Price Monitoring and Resource Units (PMRU)
s for monitoring and analysis which all are on-boarded 
on IPDMS2.0. Pharma Industries are also providing re-
quired data through interface provided for industries on 
IPDMS2.0. Some of the features has been configured for 
mobile application which is required to the public for price 
controlling and ensuring the drugs availability.
9.1.8.2.6 Student Life Cycle Management System 
(SLCMS) For Medical College
The Student Life Cycle Management System (SLCMS) 
is a SaaS-based web application designed for Medical 
Colleges 
to 
manage 
Student/Faculty 
data 
and 
services efficiently from student admission to alumni 
management. The system features digital data storage, 
role-based access, interactive dashboards, a mobile 
app (iOS/Android), payment gateway integration, digital 
signatures, SMS/Email configuration, responsive, and 
multi-user access with web security certification. Core 
modules include admission management, student 
profile 
management, 
fee/fine/refund 
management, 
timetable creation, and student attendance, examination 
scheduling and result management, digital notice boards, 
scholarship and sponsorship, and research & publication, 
Hostel management, internship management, certificate 
generation, alumni management, assignments and 
assessments, and a grievance redressal system. 
SLCMS Implemented at MGIMS Sevagram Wardha, 
SAIL Rourkela, and AIIMS Bhubaneswar. This is helpful 
in improvising the Research & Education System.
9.1.8.2.7 SaQsham
National Health System Resource Center (NHSRC), 
MoHFW under its Quality Improvement Division, has 
the mandate to certify public health facilities on defined 
standards and measuring elements implemented nation-
wide. SaQsham Portal has been designed, developed 
and put into use to support the mandate, the entire 
Quality Certification process is being automated and 
integrated into an Enterprise Workflow System to 
automate the National Quality Assurance Standards 
Certification process for health facilities across the 
nation.  SaQsham enables external assessment of 
primary & secondary care public health facilities i.e., DH, 
SDH, CHC, PHC, UPHC and HWC for NQAS, LaQshya / 
MusQan/Any Other Scheme/ Virtual certification. Quality 
Improvements (QI) division at NHSRC, MoHFW has 
been supporting the states for achieving certification in 
these health facilities. 
9.1.8.2.8 ABDM Integrations Middleware
To exchange e-Sushrut generated EMR (Electronic 
Medical Record) with ABDM (Ayushman Bharat Digital 
Mission) Ecosystem, e-Sushrut needs to support the 
building blocks of ABDM as well as Fast Healthcare 
Interoperability Resources (FHIR). e-Sushrut application 
has been upgraded for Health ID Generation, sharing the 
electronics records to digilocker, exchange of care context 
with NDHM ecosystem. The Platform provides ABHA 
Number based Patient registration, Patient waiting time 
management, Crowd Management through integrated 
Scan and Share feature in HMIS. It is made generic so 
that it can be enabled in any HMIS Deployment. It also 
helps to reduce the patient’s demographic data entry and 
typo mistakes. The solution has been implemented in 16 
AIIMS and 10 State instances of e-Sushrut HMIS.
9.1.8.3 Assistive Research in Health
9.1.8.3.1 Mental Health and Normalcy Augmentation 
System” (MANAS)
“Mental Health and Normalcy Augmentation System” 
(MANAS) is a comprehensive and scalable digital 
wellness platform, aimed to strengthen mental well-
being  through digital medium with a national scope, 
initiated and funded by the Office of the Principal 
Scientific Adviser (PSA) and endorsed by The Prime 
Minister’s Science, Technology, and Innovation Advisory 
Council (PM-STIAC), Government of India.
The MANAS platform includes the MANAS mobile app, 
a dashboard, and web services. This comprehensive 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
203
mental well-being platform is designed to host scientific 
and evidence-based indigenous mental health content. 
It also facilitates workflow management for curating 
and integrating third-party new content into the app 
while ensuring data security and privacy. Additionally, 
the platform features a visualization dashboard for 
content analysis, providing valuable insights into user 
engagement and content effectiveness. The MANAS 
app is available on both Android and Apple App stores, 
and supports English and Hindi languages. Currently, 
the app was downloaded by 34,000 devices with 21,000 
active users. In continuation with the efforts in mental 
wellness and wider outreach, C-DAC completed MANAS 
WeConnect program to create awareness among youth 
for mental wellbeing and sensitizing them to code for 
mental wellness.
9.1.8.3.2 Adaptable e-Learning Accessibility Model 
for the Disabled (e-Saadhya)
The e-Saadhya (Saral Anukulaney Adhyayan) is 
an Adaptable & Accessible e-Learning software 
framework that caters to the learning needs of children 
with mild intellectual disability and autism. It supports 
all the stakeholders, such as special educators, 
parents, rehabilitation team and Children with Special 
Needs(CwSN). It provides automated support for the 
processes used by Special educators and therapists 
in Special Schools for child assessment, creating 
individualized learning plans, and delivery of lessons. 
This framework is a unique product with a combination 
of 
standard 
diagnostic 
and 
special 
educational 
assessment 
checklists, 
and 
special 
educational 
teaching methodologies namely Applied Behavioral 
Analytics(ABA), Discrete trail training(DTT), using audio-
visual prompts and reinforcements. 
The Child Learning environment supports the features 
of Fun and Learning, online lessons, quizzes, etc. This 
environment is user-friendly with cognitive accessibility 
features embedded with audio-video navigational 
guidance and Voice support. The e-Saadhya is supported 
by Telugu, Kannada, and Hindi Indian languages making 
it viable for PAN India implementation for training to 
Special educators and CwSN.
e-Saadhya has been deployed in 15 states across 
India and continues to grow in collaboration with 
NIEPID Headquarters, Secunderabad. This year, it was 
implemented at the Department of Special Education 
for Children with Special Needs (CwSN). As part of the 
initiative, 60 special educators were trained at Ambika 
Shishu Kendra Kurnool, Vidya Vikasini Opportunity School 
Coimbatore, NIEPID Headquarters Secunderabad. 
9.1.9 Cyber Security and Cyber Forensics
9.1.9.1 National Blockchain Framework
The National Blockchain Framework (NBF) in an initiative 
towards building trust in digital systems and promoting 
research & development, technology & application 
development based on Blockchain technology. Under 
this initiative, Shri S. Krishnan, Secretary, MeitY launched 
the Vishvasya - Blockchain Technology Stack on 04th 
September 2024 to offer Blockchain-as-a-Service over 
a geographically distributed infrastructure designed 
to support various permissioned Blockchain based 
applications. A number of Government departments 
are utilizing the stack for development and deployment 
of trusted Government Services that need immutable, 
secure and verifiable records of transactions across 
multiple stakeholders. Additionally, the Secretary, MeitY 
also unveiled the NBFLite - Lightweight Blockchain 
Platform, Praamaanik - an innovative blockchain-enabled 
solution for verifying mobile app origin and a National 
Blockchain Portal.
Launch of National Blockchain Framework by the Hon’ble 
Secretary, MeitY, Shri. S Krishnan on September 04, 2024
9.1.9.2 GHOST: Generation of In-House Secure 
Trusted Elliptic Curve
GHOST is a cryptographic tool indigenously developed 
using novel algorithms for generation of secure, trusted 
and proprietary elliptic curves which are used as security 
backbone of critical applications such as digital signing, 
PKI, SSL/TLS, RNGs, authentication and encryption 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
204
services etc. GHOST tool is now deployed at Signal Unit 
of Indian Army at Anand Parvat Military Station, New 
Delhi to secure their critical security applications.
9.1.9.3 C-DAC-Intelligent Malware Sandbox
To secure Indian cyberspace from evolving malware 
threats, C-DAC has developed an indigenous Intelligent 
Malware sandbox, which has comprehensive methods, 
including 
static, 
dynamic, 
and 
computer 
vision 
approaches to detect and classify malware using artificial 
intelligence (AI).
9.1.9.4 Cyber Forensics Solutions
Under 
Cyber 
Forensics, 
C-DAC 
has 
continued 
enhancement of existing cyber forensics tools and the 
development of new tools as a part of the project titled as 
Design and Development of Advanced Forensics Data 
Analytics Tool. 
As a part of 100 days program of MeitY, enhanced 
cyber security tools including Cyber Check, Advik CDR 
Analyzer, Win-LiFT, Web Investigator, PhotoExaminer, 
and TrueImager were released by the Hon’ble Secretary, 
Shri S. Krishnan MeitY at New Delhi on September 04, 
2024. In addition to this, C-DAC has developed and 
released a mobile phone forensics software tool named 
Mobile Insighter, which supports latest version of Android 
& iPhones and different models of Drones from DJI & 
Pixhawk. 
9.1.9.5 CDACSIEM
A comprehensive security solution having a data 
aggregator which gathers immense amounts of log data 
from the entire networked environment, normalizes and 
applies analytics, as well as provides complete visibility 
of security to the SOC analyst. It is a centralized solution 
that enables detection and allows for investigation while 
providing insight visibility. CDACSIEM solution enables 
the security analysts to be more effective and efficient 
in their job of protecting the organizational digital assets 
and IT systems. The system’s capabilities include 
detailed asset discovery, log management, automated 
vulnerability scanning, threat intelligence, User and 
Entity Behavior Analytics (UEBA), EDR, and ticket 
management, among other features. CDACSIEM  is 
a robust, indigenous platform that aligns with global 
standards such as the MITRE ATT&CK framework 
and STIX, and it supports comprehensive compliance 
reporting.
CDACSIEM is now listed on the GEM portal and the 
solution has already proven its effectiveness through 
successful deployments at several prestigious institutions 
namely Madhya Pradesh Paschim Kshetra Vidyut 
Vitaran Company Ltd. (Indore), Madhya Pradesh Poorv 
Kshetra Vidyut Vitaran Company Ltd. (Jabalpur), Madhya 
Pradesh Madhya Kshetra Vidyut Vitaran Company Ltd. 
(Bhopal), Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust, Mumbai, National 
Skill Development Corporation Limited, New Delhi, India 
Trade Promotion Organization (ITPO), Delhi, Project 22, 
MHA Agency, Delhi, Murmogao Port Trust, Goa, C-DAC 
Noida Data Centre, Panjab University, Chandigarh, 
Research Centre Imarat, Hyderabad, C-DAC Centres 
(12).
C-DACSIEM is a flexible monitoring platform for 
log sources, network packet data and end points. It 
aggregates, standardizes, stores, and applies advanced 
analytics to scrutinize data, facilitating early threat 
detection and empowering organizations to conduct 
comprehensive investigations in response to alerts. It 
was implemented at ITPO in Delhi during the G20 event 
to address the challenges with real-time security threats.
9.1.9.6 GANGA
GANGA is a cryptographically secure pseudo random 
number generator (CSPRNG) indigenously designed 
and developed by C-DAC to offer desired randomness 
to the operating systems. The objective of integration 
of GANGA with any OS is to secure sensitive kernel 
operations from exploitation.
GANGA was released by Shri Bhuvnesh Kumar, IAS, 
Additional Secretary, MeitY, Govt. of India on February 
29, 2024 during the launch of the “Cryptography 
Roadmap of India”. GANGA has been evaluated and 
gone through field trials by the Indian Army and now it 
is integrated with the Indigenous Cryptographic Suite of 
the Indian Army.
9.1.10 Software Technologies including FOSS
9.1.10.1 MeriPehchaan: National Single Sign On
Details are covered in Chapter 2.

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
205
9.1.10.2 Aadhaar Data Vault (ADV) as a service 
Aadhaar Data Vault (ADV) service, developed by C-DAC 
is offered as a national service to securely store and 
manage Aadhaar numbers to various government, 
private and PSU organizations. C-DAC also offers a 
complete Aadhaar-based solutions and services in the 
form of AUA-ASA to interested entities. A total of 48 
services and 23 departments have been integrated and 
around 263 crore transactions have been carried out as 
part of this initiative.
9.1.10.3 e-Hastakshara: An Online Digital Signing 
Facility (C-DAC’s e-Sign Service)
Details are covered in Chapter-2
9.1.10.4 Employees Provident Fund Organization 
(EPFO)
C-DAC has successfully implemented and continues to 
manage the Unified Portal project for the Employees’ 
Provident Fund Organisation (EPFO). As part of the 
Centralization project, Union Minister for Labour & 
Employment and Youth Affairs & Sports, Dr. Mansukh 
Mandaviya, on August 13, 2024, introduced the new 
‘Online Facility for Surrender of Exemption from the 
EPF Scheme. This system streamlines the process by 
enabling online submission, application validation, and 
the transfer of members’ past accumulations. It replaces 
the traditional physical document submission process, 
allowing establishments to track their applications with a 
tracking ID, thus saving time and effort.
C-DAC has also successfully implemented several 
essential functionalities within the Unified Portal for the 
Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation (EPFO) like 
Joint Declaration Functionality, Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOP) for Freezing/ Defreezing, Pension 
Calculator for Higher Wages, Bulk Payment Functionality 
for Pension on Higher Wages, Bank Integration for EPFO 
Payments, Re- engineered user management system, 
etc.
9.1.11 Free and Open-Source Software
9.1.11.1 Secure BOSS OS
C-DAC Customized version of Secure BOSS, built on 
BOSS 10.0, has been specifically tailored for the Army 
Civilnet Systems to enhance security and compliance 
across the network. Army Civilnet 3.0, based on Secure 
BOSS, has been deployed on over 10,000 machines 
across the Indian Army. The customized Secure BOSS 
Linux has been installed on all client machines. The 
Internet Security Operations Centre (ISOC) is also part 
of the solution, responsible for monitoring end nodes and 
enforcing central policies on the network. 
9.1.12 Capacity Building Initiatives
9.1.12.1 
Information 
Security 
Education 
and 
Awareness (ISEA)
The ISEA project is implemented through 50 premier 
academic institutions, autonomous organizations of MeitY 
(C-DAC/NIELIT) and Technical Universities, grouped into 
10 logical clusters with 5 institutions as leads/co-leads as 
a hub in particular thematic area, supported by several 
spoke institutions to facilitate co-creation of knowledge, 
courses, tools, products/solutions, etc. 
Under the project, so far, a total of 329 officers from 
various PSUs, Government and Pvt., organizations 
were trained as Associate/ Deputy / CISOs at National 
level. Besides this, a total of 321 awareness workshops 
on Information Security have been organized through 
direct/virtual mode for school & college students, 
teachers, faculty, Government personnel, LEAs, general 
users, parents, women, CSCs, etc. covering 1,05,460 
participants and 1264 school teachers/ faculties , Police 
officers have been trained as master trainers in 5 training 
programs.
Organized 2 Cyber Safety and Security Awareness Week 
in Bihar and Uttar Pradesh and released awareness 
material, Awareness hand books , Cyber Hygiene Quiz 
, Conduct Cyber Awareness workshops at community 
centres, schools, colleges, Government offices ,Road 
shows and rally with students to create awareness on 
cyber safety. 
9.1.12.2 Future Skills PRIME
The FutureSkills Project, an upskilling and reskilling 
initiative by MeitY in collaboration with NASSCOM, aims 
to enhance skills in emerging technologies such as 
Additive Manufacturing/3D Printing, Artificial Intelligence, 
Augmented/Virtual 
Reality, 
Big 
Data 
Analytics, 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
206
Blockchain, Cloud Computing, Cybersecurity, Internet 
of Things, Robotic Process Automation, and Social 
& Mobile technologies. C-DAC serves as the Project 
Management Unit (PMU) for this program. 
MeitY has extended the Phase 2 of the program in 
April 2024 for 3 more years with an augmented Target 
of reskilling/upskilling 10 Lakh+ Beneficiaries by 2027. 
During the period, the C-DAC/NIELIT has developed 
193 trainers and reskilled/upskilled 5,563 beneficiaries 
through 13 Bridge Courses developed by 40 Teams of 22 
C-DAC/NIELIT Centers. Furthermore, 1,213 government 
officers from more than 20 government organizations 
were trained to enhance their skills and competencies, 
while 931 participants took part in bootcamps designed 
to provide hands-on learning and specialized training. 
9.1.12.3 SwaYaan- Capacity Building for Human 
Resource 
Development 
in 
Unmanned 
Aircraft 
Systems/Drone & related technology
SwaYaan, a MeitY initiative, aims for positioning 
India as a global drone hub by 2030 through various 
capacity building programs in Drone/UAS & related 
technologies. The project seeks to establish a robust 
Drone/UAS Industry-Academia Ecosystem, leveraging 
over 30 institutions and industries through a hub-and-
spoke model. Five premier institutions (IITs, IIITs, and 
IISc) serve as Resource Centers, while 15 IITs and 
NITs, alongside 10 C-DAC/NIELIT Centres, function 
as Participating Institutes. The initiative focuses on 
key areas like Drone Electronics, GNC Algorithms & 
Simulation, Aeromechanics, Allied Drone Technologies, 
and Drone Applications. C-DAC Hyderabad leads as the 
Program Management Unit, supported by 5 other C-DAC 
Institutes. Additionally, strategic industry partnerships 
with organizations like the Drone Federation of India 
(DFI), FICCI, and Sector Skill Councils further strengthen 
the initiative.
In the current year, a diverse range of programs has been 
launched to enhance knowledge and skills across various 
learner categories. The ‘Training and Development’ 
segment included 8 Faculty Development Programs 
(177 participants), 1 Workshop (85 participants), and 
191 Bootcamp sessions (7,138 participants), providing 
hands-on experience for faculty members, open learners, 
and students. Furthermore, Drone/UAS laboratories 
were established at 25 institutes, including those in the 
North-East region. The ‘Academic Programs’ launched 
this year comprise 4 batches of a 6-month certificate 
program (17 participants), an M-Tech program (12 
students total), and 36 retrofitting electives (755 
participants). In the realm of ‘Research and Innovation’, 
40 Proof of Concept projects were developed, involving 
237 participants, with 14 published papers and 3 patents 
contributed by 56 researchers. Two Qualification Packs 
have also been approved by NCVET: (a) Junior Drone 
Engineer (NSQF Level 5.5) by ESSCI and (b) Drone Data 
Analyst (NSQF Level 5) by TSSC. Overall, the initiative 
has positively impacted over 8,500 participants through 
more than 300 activities across 60+ cities, reflecting a 
strong commitment to advancing expertise in the Drone/
UAS and related sectors.
9.1.12.4 Cyber Gyan- A Real-Time Cyber Security 
Scenario-based Self-Paced Learning Training Facility 
Cyber GYAN, was launched to provide specialized 
cybersecurity training for SC, ST, and Economically 
Weaker Section undergraduate and postgraduate 
students, as well as faculty members from government 
colleges across India. The project aims to establish a Self-
Paced Learning Training Facility focused on enhancing 
cybersecurity skills within the academic community.
As part of this initiative, 100 real-time cyber-attack 
scenarios based on modern tools and techniques have 
been developed. These scenarios provide participants 
with a practical understanding of cyber defense 
mechanisms in a controlled yet realistic setting. Till 
date, 5600 students have been registered to the portal 
and 2600 have been trained. 538 faculty members 
have also successfully completed the training program, 
demonstrating the project’s far-reaching impact in building 
a skilled and informed workforce in cybersecurity.
9.1.13 Education and Training
C-DAC’s Education and Training have been developing 
skilled resources as part of the Skill India initiative through 
its Post Graduate Diploma and Post Graduate Degree 
awarding programmes for its internal human resources 
needs of Research and Development activities and IT 
industry. These skill enhancement ICT training courses 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
207
are imparted by C-DAC training centres as well as 
Authorised Training Centres spread across India.
C-DAC’s education and training division is involved in the 
following activities:
1.	
Post Graduate Diploma courses in ICT
2.	
Education and Training Technologies
3.	
Comprehensive Recruitment System
4.	
International Training & Solutions
5.	
IT & Skill Development Programmes for Capacity 
Building
6.	
Corporate Training for Corporate, PSU and 
Government Organization
9.1.13.1 PG Diploma Courses in ICT
A total of 3789 students completed the training on 
22 February 2024 and placement for the successful 
students was completed on July 31, 2024 in five regions. 
A total of 3102 students Joined the training in March 06, 
2024 and placement for the successful students has 
commenced in five regions from August 28, 2024. A total 
of 3603 students (including 44 under NSM and 9 under 
Drone) joined across India in the August 29, 2024 batch. 
These students will undergo the C-DAC Course End 
Examination (CCEE) from January 20 - 24, 2025. The 
placements of the successful students will commence on 
February 21, 2025.
The admission for the Post Graduate Diploma in ICT 
for the February 2025 batch has commenced from 
November 28, 2024 and the C-DAC Common Admission 
Test (C-CAT) is scheduled on January 11 and 12, 2025. 
There are over 7058 aspirants applied for the PG Diploma 
courses and will appear in the C-CAT. The course is 
going to commence from February 25, 2025. 
9.1.13.2 Corporate Training for Corporate, PSU and 
Government Organization
C-DAC 
has 
conducted 
Institutional 
training 
for 
organizations including DRDO, Indian Armed Forces, 
and NTIPRIT, Ghaziabad. C-DAC has also conducted 
the ITEC and e-ITEC programs for the international 
participants. C-DAC is conducting training to five (5) 
International participants from friendly nations who are 
joining various Post Graduate Diploma courses such as 
PG-DAC & PG-DITISS from Argentina (2), and Solomon 
Island (3) nominated by the Ministry of External Affairs 
(MEA). In the August 2024 batch, 5 participants from 
Vietnam have joined the PG Diploma courses. The HQ 
Southern Command Pune training on Incident handling 
and security will commence on January 06, 2025. The 
institutional training for ACCS, Ahmednagar commences 
on January 07, 2025. 
9.1.13.3 Capacity Building in HPC programme
C-DAC have completed the NSM Capacity building 
project by conducting two HPC programmes for the 
Socially Disadvantage Group candidates. Over 242 
students were trained in the PG Diploma in HPC System 
Administration and PG Diploma in HPC Application 
Programming over last two years. 82 students have been 
trained during the year 2024-25 over two batches. 
C-DAC have conducted the Faculty Development 
Programme in HPC domain association with AICTE for 
over 84 faculties. C-DAC have conducted trained the 
278 students of VIT Mumbai in Python Programming as 
a academic collaboration initiative.
9.1.13.4 OLabs NextG: Next Generation Online Labs 
(OLabs) for schools
The objective of OLabs NextG: Next Generation Online 
Labs (OLabs) for schools, is to design and develop 500 
Online Labs for Schools for various subjects of classes 
6-12. This is being undertaken in collaboration with 
Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Kerala. Current Status of 
the project is as given below:
• 
77 New labs (Maths-34, 5 Social Science, 38 
Language labs) developed by C-DAC in various 
subjects from Class 6 to Class 12.
• 
212 online labs (including 173 Olabs labs and 39 
new labs added) integrated on the Diksha Platform.
• 
Training of 1375 teachers conducted for Online 
labs via online mode till Dec 2024.
• 
OLabs offline version deployment was done in 142 
schools (342 devices) in 33 districts of Rajasthan
• 
OLabs mobile app (version-1.0.15) is hosted 
on Mobile Seva app store and Google Play 
Store. 	

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
208
• 
OLabs Windows installer (version 2.2):- Created 
three class wise separate installer in this version of 
installer ie for class 6 to 8, 9-10 and 11-12.
Activities planned till March 2025
• 
OLabsThon  : OLabs Hackathon was announced 
in December 2024 across India to invite innovative 
ideas into this pool of labs, Till 6th January 2025, 
65 teams registered from the different colleges of 
India. The hackathon will be completed in February 
2025
• 
23 new labs to be developed to complete the target 
of 250 labs.
• 
2000 teachers’ training to be completed.
• 
Deployment of OLabs in 90 schools across India.
9.1.13.5 
Process 
Automation 
for 
Competitive 
Examinations (PACE)
Since January 2024, under the PACE project, C-DAC 
has successfully completed the Graduate Aptitude 
Test in Engineering’s (GATE 2024) Result Processing, 
Scorecard Generation for 8 Lakh Candidates, Joint 
Admission Test for Masters (JAM 2024) Result 
Processing, Scorecard Generation, Choice Filling, Seat 
Counseling for 65 thousand candidates, and the National 
Board of Examinations (NBE) seat counseling for 2600 
seats for NBE’s DNB/PDCET/DNB (POST MBBS). 
Furthermore, PACE has secured a work order for the 
next three cycles of GATE and JAM exams process 
automation. 
9.1.14 North East Initiatives 
1.	
Vulnerability Assessment and Penetration Testing 
(VAPT) was conducted at the National Investigation 
Agency (NIA) offices in Guwahati and Imphal, and 
it is funded by NIA and is currently ongoing. The 
Stage I report has been submitted to the clients 
upon completion, and Stage II will commence once 
confirmation is received from the client’s end. 
2.	
The project titled “Security Audit of Online Agenda 
Submission Portal, funded by Mizoram State 
E-Governance Society, is Ongoing. The Stage I 
has been completed, with reports submitted to the 
clients.
3.	
The project titled “E-HRMIS for Society for 
Electronic Transactions and Security (SETS)” 
Chennai is funded by SETS Chennai. The Project 
is currently in the User Acceptance Testing (UAT) 
phase. 
4.	
Developing 
a 
Time 
Sensitive 
Networking 
software stack and integrating TSN and TCC 
communication for the Smart City project, with the 
work currently in its initiation phase to enhance 
real-time data transmission and connectivity in 
urban infrastructures
5. 
In collaboration with IIT Guwahati, a fluorescence 
intensity measuring device (PRATIDIPT) has been 
completely developed and it is under validation 
and currently undergoing rigorous testing at IIT 
Guwahati, Bioscience Lab. 
6.	
The development of a Quantum Framework for 
Natural Disaster Management in North East India 
is currently ongoing, with the implementation 
of classical algorithms in progress. This project 
leverages Quantum Machine Learning (QML) 
algorithms to simulate optimal escape routing 
during emergencies, aiming to enhance disaster 
response and management in the region.
7.	
Under the Centre for HPC Upskilling and 
Knowledge Sharing (C-HUK) Project, the 4th 
Faculty Development Programme (FDP) was 
held at the North Eastern Regional Institute of 
Science and Technology (NERIST). Additionally, 
the 2nd Capacity Building Programme (CBP) ran 
from March 1 to August 31, 2024, followed by the 
commencement of the ACC batch which started 
on September 01, 2024 and will end in February 
2025.
8.	
The Work-Based Learning (WBL) Internship 
Program, funded by MeitY (2022–2027), enhances 
employability for SC, ST, EWS, and women 
candidates by providing hands-on experience in 
AI, cybersecurity, IoT, and more, with a monthly 
stipend of `10,000. At C-DAC Silchar, 27 candidates 
joined level 1, 7 advanced to level 2, and 16 have 
been certified. A new WBL advertisement is issued 
in November-December 2024. 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
209
9.	
The first Post Graduate Diploma in Artificial 
Intelligence (PG-DAI) course, launched on August 
29, 2024 offering in-depth training in artificial 
intelligence. The course is being conducted entirely 
online, providing flexible learning opportunities. A 
total of 5 candidates have enrolled in the program, 
ensuring focused, personalized instruction. 
9.2 Society for Applied Microwave Electronics 
Engineering and Research (SAMEER)
9.2.1 Introduction
Society for Applied Microwave Electronics Engineering 
and Research (SAMEER) is an autonomous R&D 
institution under the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY), Government of India. It 
was formed in 1984 as an R&D Laboratory of the then 
Department of Electronics, Government of India with an 
objective to support the various Radio frequency (RF) 
and Microwave application specific requirements of the 
different ministries of the Government of India. SAMEER 
has five centres located in Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, 
Visakhapatnam and Guwahati. The headquarters of 
SAMEER is located at IIT campus, Powai, Mumbai. 
SAMEER undertakes various state-of-the-art and 
challenging projects from HF to photonics with the aim of 
remaining at the forefront in the various microwave and 
millimetre wave domains including (but not limited to) 
the linear accelerator technology, atmospheric radars, 
microwave heating and drying, photonics, microwave 
communication, 5G and 6G communication systems, 
quantum technology and other such applications. 
SAMEER also designs and develops passive and 
active components and subsystems such as amplifiers, 
antennas, digital receivers, transceivers etc. The 
research findings and results are regularly documented 
and reported in reputed journals and conferences by 
SAMEER scientists.
SAMEER also offers test and measurement services in 
Electromagnetic Interference & Compatibility (EMI/EMC), 
antenna performance measurement services, shielding 
effectiveness 
evaluation 
of 
chambers, 
calibration 
services for different electronic equipment and testing 
of equipment to safety standards to support private 
industries and government agencies of the country in 
qualifying their products as per various national and 
international standards.
9.2.2 SAMEER CENTRES 
SAMEER Centres

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
210
9.2.3 R&D Activities
9.2.3.1 NexGen Technology
9.2.3.1.1 Research in Bharat 6G
• 
Sub: 
THz 
Wireless 
communication 
with 
Intelligent Reflecting Surfaces(IRS)
	
The objective of this new technology demonstration 
project sponsored by MeitY is to exhibit a fully 
functional 6G high speed communication link 
at 142 GHz under the Atma Nirbhar Bharat 
mission. SAMEER is executing this project with 
IIT Madras as a consortium member. SAMEER 
Kolkata indigenously developed the D-band 
transmitter, receiver and lens antenna exclusively 
for this communication link. SAMEER successfully 
exhibited a Line-of-Sight (LOS) link at 142 GHz 
using the baseband signal generated by IIT 
Madras. SAMEER demonstrated 6G 6.4 Gbps 
Data Transmission in India Mobile Congress 2024. 
This kind of high frequency high speed wireless 
data link has been demonstrated for the first time in 
India with all indigenously developed components.
 
 6G LOS communication link demonstration at India 
Mobile Congress 2024
	
6G 
antennas 
and 
components 
were 
also 
demonstrated during the “Digital India Future Labs” 
event in Delhi organized by MeitY in February 
2024.
• 
6G: THz Test bed with Orbital Angular 
Momentum and Multiplexing
	
This 6G Test bed sponsored by DoT, is being 
implemented by SAMEER, jointly with three other 
IITs with the objective of design, development and 
deployment of end to end 6G Test bed at 270 GHz 
and is the first of its kind in the country. SAMEER 
has indigenously developed the J-band 4-channel 
transmitter and receiver which were deployed to 
successfully establish a Line-of-Sight (LOS) link 
at 283 GHz using the baseband signal generated 
by IIT Madras. The 6G components developed by 
SAMEER were launched during the India Mobile 
Congress 2024 by Shri Jyotiraditya Scindia, 
Honorable Union Minister for Communications and 
Development of North Eastern Region, Govt. of 
India. Circuit components such as band pass filter 
at J-band and Coaxial cavity filter for the baseband 
channel have been designed and developed.
6G components developed 
for the baseband channel 
Band pass filter at J-band
mm wave radiometer
9.2.3.2 Societal Applications
9.2.3.2.1 ATMOSPHERIC SYSTEMS
• 
Development of MMW Radiometer for NE 
Region of India for Climate Modelling Studies 
for Weather Changes
	
A 
millimeter-wave, 
ground-based 
passive 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
211
radiometer system has been developed in-house 
for unattended, time-contiguous measurement of 
tropospheric temperature and humidity profiles in 
the atmosphere (~ 10 km).
	
Statistical (machine learning-regressor and neural 
network-based) and physical modelling (optimal 
estimation, 1D-Var model) based an inverse model 
was developed for the retrieval of temperature 
and humidity profiles. The trained inverse model 
was operated on the test data (15%) brightness 
temperature to retrieve temperature and humidity 
profiles and compared with the actual profiles. 
This routine was implemented in all regressor and 
neural network models.
9.2.3.3 Medical Systems
• 
Indigenous 
Magnetic 
Resonance 
Imaging 
(IMRI)
	
The 
project 
entitled 
“Indigenous 
Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging (IMRI) – A National Mission 
(Swadeshi Chumbakiya Anu-naad Chitran – Ek 
Rashtriya Abhiyaan) (SCAN-ERA)” was initiated 
with a goal to “Design, develop and test an 
indigenous 1.5 Tesla MRI system for medical 
imaging.”
1.	
System-I: (Utilizing procured magnet): Testing 
was conducted with the body transmit and receive 
coil and images were also obtained across 
multiple sequences like: Spin Echo T1-weighted 
and PD-weighted sequences. Through rigorous 
experimentation guided by the task force, SAMEER 
has made significant progress in enhancing the 
image quality. A state-of-the-art RF amplifier, was 
successfully integrated with System I, delivering 
good-quality imaging results. Comprehensive 
quality assurance tests on ACR phantoms were 
completed, 
embedded 
coil 
development 
is 
underway and multichannel imaging trials on knee 
and spine regions were successfully conducted 
on human volunteers, demonstrating clinical 
readiness.
2.	
System-II: (with India magnet): The magnet 
developed in India, has reached its final stages of 
testing and was ramped to 1.5 T. Following a few 
more tests, this magnet will soon be shipped to 
SAMEER Mumbai for integration, paving the way 
for a fully self-reliant MRI ecosystem in India.
This initiative not only propels India’s self-reliance in 
critical medical technology but also reinforces SAMEER’s 
commitment to advancing healthcare innovation for the 
nation.
Orientation-Coronal RL for Spine  
Echo image TI weighted
9.2.3.4 RF & MICROWAVE SYSTEMS
• 
Through Wall Imaging (TWI) Radar for Home 
Land security
	
An Ultra Short pulse Radar imaging system for 
acquiring a microwave image from behind the wall 
or through the wall has been developed. This was 
a MeitY sponsored project. This radar technique 
addresses electromagnetic “vision” behind walls in 
order to detect, count, and localize people inside a 
room/ building, detection of human target and its 
movement. Such radars are useful for applications 
like Home Land Security, Anti –Terrorism, Fire 
Fighting – rescuing humans trapped inside burning 
structure, hidden weapon detection in box and 
observation at short distances. This is a low power 
and low cost Radar which provides the location of 
human being/other objects in 2D from behind the 
wall. Detection and location of the object can be 
found with fine imaging resolution, good through 
wall characteristics, and high performance in noisy 
environments. Differentiation of the objects behind 
the wall was also achieved. 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
212
• 
ToT of °Brix meter
	
SAMEER’s Microwave-Based Compact, Cost-
Effective 
Brix 
Meter 
is 
a 
ground-breaking 
solution for the sugar industry, enabling precise 
°Brix measurement – a key indicator of sugar 
concentration. This innovative, non-destructive 
technology facilitates real-time monitoring of °Brix 
levels during the crystallization process, addressing 
critical quality control needs in sugar production, 
fruit juice processing, and soft drink manufacturing. 
Through an Expression of Interest (EOI) process, 
Technology Transfer (ToT) agreements were signed 
with Toshniwal Hyvac Pvt. Ltd. and Sir Automation 
Industries, enabling large-scale production of this 
advanced system. The ToT event was graced by 
Shri S. Krishnan, Secretary, MeitY, in Mumbai on 
August 10, 2024, marking a significant milestone in 
bringing indigenous technology to the forefront of 
India’s sugar industry.
 
BRIX ToT with Toshniwal Hyvac Pvt. Ltd. and Sir 
Automation Industries in the  
presence of Shri S. Krishnan, Secretary, MeitY
1.	
Indian Defense Indigenization
	
SAMEER has been awarded the contract for the 
design and development of Integrated Control 
System (ICS) and subsystems. The development 
of various subsystems has been completed.
2.	
Services
• 
Testing and calibration services
	
SAMEER has carried out EMI/EMC and Safety 
and Environmental testing assignments for more 
than 125 industries for testing their products as 
per various international and national military and 
civilian standards. EMC calibration services were 
offered to more than 25 laboratories. EMC design 
consultancy was offered to various companies 
and Shielding effectiveness test was done for 
various paints and shielded chambers. The NABL 
accreditation for the test and calibration labs were 
renewed where needed in order to offer quality 
testing services to the industry.
	
SAMEER supports the national missions like 
“Make-in-India” and “Digital India” by encouraging 
Indigenization in Electronics, Electrical and IT 
sectors. Facilities staged at SAMEER are very 
important for defense sector of the country and 
ensures satisfactory performance of strategic 
hardware and all critical Infrastructure sectors by 
ensuring protection against EMP.
 
EMP qualification for products such as Indigenously 
developed Bullet Proof Vehicle, Nuclear radiation 
detection probe  for EMP,  Bullet Proof Vehicle, 
Direct Extractor & Cross Contamination Monitor 
(DECCOM) and indegenously developed highly 
specialised EMP filters was carried out.
	
Radiated Emission of  Electric Multiple Unit (EMU) 
was performed at G in Stationary mode and Slow 
moving mode (Traction & Braking mode), Magnetic 
field & Electric field measurement was performed 
at  a Data centre in Pune and IIT Bombay.
• 
EMC Consultancy
	
EMC design consultancy was offered to a number 
of industries. EMC consultancy was provided 
for “EMC Shielded Door for Naval Ships”. EMC 
Shielded Doors Meets the Design objective of 60dB 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
213
Shielding Effectiveness in the frequency range 
10KHz to 40 GHz. Consultancy was also provided 
for HEMP hardened structures, EMC qualification 
of torpedoes, Waste & fresh water monitoring 
system, Solar Controllers, thermal camera.
3.	
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)
• 
On May 27, 2024, SAMEER entered into MoUs and 
NDAs with seven leading industry players, in the 
presence of Secretary of MeitY. This partnership 
marks a vital step in transferring IMRI technology 
to industry, ensuring that this pioneering innovation 
reaches the public efficiently and effectively.
• 
MoU was signed between CTTC Bhubaneswar 
and SAMEER Kolkata. This was initiated to get 
precision fabrication support for various projects 
being executed by SAMEER.
• 
In recognition of the capabilities and credentials of 
thermal design and consultancy services offered 
to URSC/ISRO, Bangalore, an MoU was signed 
between SAMEER and SAC/ISRO, Ahmedabad 
on 6th February 2024. The main purpose of this 
collaboration is to carry out Thermal Design and 
Consultancy Services through thermal simulation 
of spacecraft and its sub-systems.
• 
CSIR-CEERI and SAMEER signed an MoU 
to combine expertise of both organizations for 
development of Vacuum Electronics Devices and 
Components aimed to accelerate deployment of 
Indigenous Vacuum Electronics solutions.
• 
SAMEER and University of Mumbai signed an 
MoU for collaboration in research work.
• 
SAMEER 
and 
the 
Military 
College 
of 
Telecommunication Engineering (MCTE), Mhow 
signed a MoU to advance collaboration in ‘Next 
Generation Wireless Technologies for the Indian 
Army’.
• 
Technology for safe storage of grains in warehouses 
developed by SAMEER was transferred to Paras 
Defense and Space Ltd at the launch of Digital 
India Future Labs in the presence of Honorable 
MoS Shri. Rajeev Chandrashekar on 4th February 
2024 as a step towards Innovation, Science and 
Technology theme of Viksit Bharat @2047.
• 
SAMEER and Gurutvaa Systems Pvt. Ltd, (GSPL), 
Pune entered into a Memorandum of Understanding 
to combine expertise for development of home 
grown technologies in the areas of RF systems and 
components, Radar and communication equipment 
and areas of mutual interest for industry.
• 
An MoU was signed  between SAMEER and Three 
D Integrated Solution Limited (an airport systems 
solutions provider) in the esteemed presence of 
Prof. Ajay Sood, Principal Scientific Adviser, GoI 
and Shri S. Krishnan, Secretary, MeitY, GoI.
4.	
Skill Development
	
Work Based Learning (WBL) Programme:
	
SAMEER is implementing the WBL programme 
sponsored by MeitY. The main objective of this 
programme is to provide an opportunity to SC/
ST/EWS/Women candidates to acquire Technical 
skills in emerging technologies that make them 
industry-ready. A number of candidates completed 
their Level 1 and the advanced Level 2 WBL 
programmes at all the five Centres of SAMEER.
9.3	
Centre for Materials for Electronics Technology 
(C-MET) 
Centre for Materials for Electronics Technology (C-MET) 
was set up as a registered Scientific Society in March 
1990 under the Department of Electronics (now Ministry 
of Electronics & Information Technology) as a unique 
concept for development of viable technologies in the 
area of materials mainly for electronics with the objectives 
of;
• 
To establish technology up to pilot scale for a 
range of electronic materials and transfer the same 
to industry for commercialization.
• 
To establish relevant characterization facilities.
• 
To undertake applied research activities in the 
areas of its operation.
9.3.1 Core competence at C-MET laboratories
C-MET’s R & D activities have been implemented in three 
laboratories i.e. Pune, Hyderabad and Thrissur. C-MET 
headquarter is at Pune monitoring the administrative & 
technical activity and coordination with the MeitY. Each 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
214
of C-MET laboratories has its own area of specialization 
with requisite infrastructure and expertise. This approach 
has proven to be successful in creating core competence 
at each laboratory.
a.	
Pune laboratory: Pune laboratory is mainly 
focusing on cutting edge R & D research on 
materials for Additive Manufacturing (CoE), 
electronic packaging, renewable energy, energy 
storage (CoE), sensors and nano-materials/
composites, this also includes inorganic materials, 
polymers, organics and glasses, National Centre 
on Quantum Materials Technology (NCQMT). 
These key areas of research have been thrived out 
into various inter-disciplinary applications.
b.	
Hyderabad laboratory: C-MET, Hyderabad has 
evolved as a unique facility for high pure materials 
in the country and is working independently in a 
focused manner to create excellent national facility 
for ultra-pure materials, compound semiconductors, 
MEMS acoustic sensors, NavIC antennas for 
location mapping, Permanent magnets for electric 
vehicles, refractory metals, alloys, Restriction 
of Hazardous Substances (RoHS) and E-waste 
recycling.
c.	
Thrissur laboratory: Major thrust area of C-MET 
Thrissur includes microwave material (including 
microwave dielectrics and substrates), energy 
materials (Carbon aerogel and Graphene based 
super capacitors), Sensors and Actuators (Thermal 
sensors, Piezo ceramics and Piezo actuators) and 
Nanomaterial (nano structured oxides, thin films, 
thick films and materials for Plasmonic application), 
India Innovation Centre for Graphene (IICG) and 
IIoT sensors.
Various reputed organizations such as DRDO, ISRO and 
DAE institutions have joined hands with C-MET through 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) to facilitate 
collaborative activities. These meaningful associations 
exemplify C-MET’s dedication towards encouraging 
innovation, knowledge exchange, and progress in 
diverse fields through joint efforts.
9.3.2	 Products developed by C-MET for different 
applications 
• 
3D Printable Composite Filaments and 3D 
printed Patch Antenna, materials for Additive 
Manufacturing technology.
• 
DLP-based 3D printing technology for low-cost 
Low Temperature Co-Fired Ceramic (LTCC) based 
electronics package fabrication
• 
Nano silver screen-printable ink for flexible 
Electronics Applications 
• 
Silver screen-printed RFID tags technology for 
NFC applications 
• 
Plasmonic 
based 
portable 
Biosensor 
with 
disposable chip developed jointly with C-MET 
and Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, 
Thiruvananthapuram
• 
Eddy current sensor fabricated using LTCC 
technology at C-MET, Pune
• 
LTCC based Micro coolers with one inlet and one 
outlet configuration for 200W microprocessors.
• 
Polybutadiene-based Cu cladded MW substrates 
of various dielectric constants
• 
CuIn1-xGaxSe2 and perovskite thin films and 
tandem solar cell fabrication
• 
New photocatalyst based on coupled catalytic 
system for Hydrogen generation and Metal Organic 
Frameworks (MOFs) for hydrogen storage. 
• 
Developed the first indigenous pilot plant to produce 
space grade Hafnium (Hf) metal is established 
at C-MET, Hyderabad with the financial support 
from VSSC, ISRO. The plant has the capacity to 
produce 320 kg/annum of Hf sponge.
• 
Indigenously designed and developed Hydrogen 
Decrepitation Furnace
• 
Developed 
a 
cost-effective 
technology 
for 
discarded Li-ion battery recycling and transfer the 
same to 15 industries. 
• 
Indigenous development of processing equipment 
for Printed Circuit Boards (PCB) recycling at 1000 
kg per day capacity.

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
215
• 
Technology development on spent permanent 
magnets recycling and End of Life (EoL) Silicon 
Solar cells recycling. 
• 
Developed Single element ultrasound transducer 
with central frequency of 3.5 MHz
• 
Developed the ferrite/ferromagnetic based metal 
oxide-polymer composites as microwave absorbing 
material.
• 
Miniaturized chip type multilayer type piezo 
actuator
• 
Tri-band composite NavIC Antenna
• 
Humidity/Temperature sensor Module with Zigbee 
communication
• 
Wi-Fi enabled temperature module for cold storage 
and perishable food and medicine supply
• 
Soil moisture sensor
The research achievements of C-MET have been 
particularly exciting, evident through 47 publications 
in esteemed peer-reviewed international journals, 10 
prestigious awards and recognitions, 9 inventive patents, 
and 3 impactful books authored by our scientists. 
Additionally, researchers have contributed to the scientific 
community through 49 invited lectures at both national 
and international events, and they made their mark by 
presenting 60 enlightening papers at conferences and 
symposia of national and global significance.
9.4	
Education and Research Network (ERNET) 
India
9.4.1	 VSAT Network
ERNET India operates a VSAT Network in C-band 
which provides reliable Internet / Intranet access to 
education and research institutions located remotely 
in the country. The VSAT Hub is located at Bengaluru 
and it also functions as the Network Operations Centre 
(NOC). Presently, the network has 103MHz transponder 
bandwidth on GSAT satellite and this bandwidth is 
successfully used in providing High Capacity SCPC 
VSAT connectivity services to Lakshadweep Islands and 
Andaman & Nicobar.
The following are major projects under VSAT Network:
 
High Capacity SCPC VSAT links for National 
Knowledge Network (NKN)
	
ERNET India has established two High Capacity 
SCPC VSAT links for NKN project of MeitY located 
at (i) NKN Kavaratti, the U. T. of Lakshadweep 
Islands; and (ii) NKN Port Blair, the U. T. of Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands. The links are operational 
with total satellite bandwidth of 53MHz and are 
being used by NKN for providing connectivity to 
knowledge institutions of the respective areas. 
High Capacity SCPC VSAT at Kavaratti, the U.T. of 
Lakshadweep Island for NKN
 
High Capacity SCPC VSAT links for LITSS 
Lakshadweep
ERNET India has established 09 High Capacity SCPC 
VSAT links for Lakshadweep Information Technology 
Services Society (LITSS) in 09 Islands of Lakshadweep 
viz., Agatti, Amini, Andrott, Chetlat, Kadmat, Kalpeni, 
Kavaratti, Kiltan and Minicoy. The links are functional 
with total satellite bandwidth of 50MHz and are being 
used by LITSS, Lakshadweep.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
216
9.4.2	 Eduroam (education roaming) services in India
The ‘eduroam’ stands for education roaming services. 
It is the secure, world-wide roaming access service 
developed for the research and education community. It 
allows students, researchers and staff from participating 
institutions to obtain Internet connectivity across campus 
and when visiting other participating institutions. The 
‘eduroam’ service is available in 106 territories worldwide.
ERNET India is a National Roaming Operator for 
providing eduroam services in India. This facility has been 
successfully availed by Indian and foreign participants in 
the universities/ institutions. Academic and Research 
Institutions including IITs, IIMs, NITs, Central and State 
Universities and various other renowned institutions are 
benefited from these services. 
9.4.3 
Establishment 
of 
Intelligent 
Educational 
Infrastructure (Smart) in Eklavya Model Residential 
Schools (EMRSs)
The project entitled ‘Establishment of Intelligent 
Educational Infrastructure (Smart) in Eklavya Model 
Residential Schools (EMRSs)’, approved by MeitY and 
jointly funded by MeitY and Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
(MoTA), is being implemented by ERNET India. The 
objective of the project is to setup the educational 
infrastructure in 328 nos. of EMRSs by creating 
ecosystem using latest tools and technologies, which 
helps to improve the learning outcome and also to 
provide the Internet connectivity in EMRSs. In phase-1 
and 2, the ICT infrastructure has been installed and 
commissioned at 174 schools. In phase-3, the work of 
setting up of smart classes in the remaining 154 EMR 
schools is under progress. 
9.4.4 Setting up Wi-Fi Enabled Campus Network at 
Patna University, Patna
ERNET India has established MeitY funded project 
“Setting up a Wi-Fi enabled campus network at Patna 
University, Patna, Bihar”. The objective of the project 
was to setup a model Wi-Fi Enabled Campus Network 
at Patna University. The network at Patna University is a 
controller based high speed wireless network with security 
and centralized monitoring & management systems. The 
project was made functional and operational with effect 
from 5th March 2024 and is under warranty support for a 
period of 02 years. 
9.4.5 Web Hosting Services
ERNET India is providing webhosting infrastructure on 
cloud and providing web hosting as a service on both 
sharing and dedicated mode to various academic & 
research institutions, organizations and departments of 
Government for hosting their websites, etc.
9.4.6 Participation in International Collaboration 
ERNET India is a primary member of Asia Pacific 
Advanced Network (APAN) association which has 
members from various countries including India, Australia, 
New Zealand, Japan, Singapore, Malaysia, South Korea 
& China. APAN provides a forum for user communities to 
come together with network engineers to help promote 
and exploit opportunities to enhance research and 
education in relevant disciplines, like Tele-health, Natural 
disaster mitigation, Research collaboration, Knowledge 
discovery, etc. The Director General of ERNET India is 
an elected Director of APAN Board. Further, an official 
of ERNET India has been awarded fellowship under 
Fellowship program of APAN 57 meeting which was held 
in February 2024.
ERNET India is also a member of Asia Pacific Network 
Information Centre(APNIC) under ‘Large’ category. 
APNIC is a Regional Internet Registry (RIR) for the Asia 
Pacific region for providing Internet number resources to 
its members. It is one of the world’s five RIRs (Regional 
Internet Registry’s) and is part of the Number Resource 
Organization (NRO). APNIC manages Internet resources 
according to policies developed through an open process 
of consultation and consensus. The officers of ERNET 
India participated in APNIC-57 during 27 Feb-1 March 
2024 in Bangkok (Thailand) and APNIC-58 during 3-6 
September, 2024 in Wellington, New Zealand.
9.4.7 Domain Registration:
ERNET India is an exclusive Registrar for Domain name 
registration for the education and research sector under.
in registry. 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
217
Under the .IN Registry, ERNET India has been registering 
3rd level domain names under ac.in, edu.in, res.in since 
2005. Additionally, ERNET India registers fo|k-Hkkjr 
under Internationalized domain names (IDN). During the 
financial year 2023-24, ERNET India has also started 
registering domain names under f'k{kk-Hkkjr and 'kks/k-
Hkkjr.
In pursuit of providing high-quality services to domain 
users, ERNET India has developed an integrated domain 
portal for domain registration with Online payment, 
DNS Services and Value-Added Services i.e Website 
as a Service (WaaS) and Learning Management as a 
Service (LMaaS). Following are the key features of new 
integrated domain portal:
1.	
Registration and renewal of domain names for 
multiple years from 1year to 10 years. 
2.	
Registration of domain names under 2 additional 
domain extensions - f'k{kk-Hkkjr and 'kks/k-Hkkjr.
3.	
Easy to use online payment options including UPI
4.	
Dual Authentication for domain users for secure 
access to portal 
5.	
Online updation of user contact information records 
and Nameservers
6.	
Customer support through Chat Bot
7.	
Provision of In-house Secure DNS Services 
8.	
Generation of customized MIS reports and various 
customized settings of portal through admin panel 
Figures: The integrated domain portal was launched by 
Hon’ble Secretary, MeitY on 5th Jan, 2024
Under the Value Added Services(VAS), any Institute 
(domain user) can create its own customized website 
and LMS portal/website with few clicks and minimal 
technical expertise. ERNET India is providing these 
domain related services at very nominal rates.
Following are the key features of the VAS:
a)	
Creation of CMS based secure website/portal in 
quick manner with click of few buttons.
b)	
Various ready-to-use templates to choose from, for 
the creation of website/portal
c)	
Specific Templates for Schools, Colleges and 
Universities for customized website
d)	
Upload educational contents such as presentations, 
pdf, docs etc.
e)	
One-Click secure hosting (https) of customized 
websites of domain users on ERNET India’s cloud.
Currently, there are more than 18,000 active domains 
registered under the domain services of ERNET India. 
9.4.8. Optical Wireless Access Network for Rural and 
Urban Communication
ERNET India has implemented Optical Wireless Access 
network for rural and urban communications, jointly 
with Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology, 
Delhi(IIITD), funded by MeitY. Under the urban scenario, 
Handover Algorithms for Hybrid LiFi-WiFi co-existence 
and link aggregation were developed. 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
218
Under the rural scenario, an optical link was established 
from LiFi transmitter to solar panel as an optical receiver. 
The experimental evaluations were carried out in outdoor 
environment. The peak data rate of 10 Mbps was achieved 
at a distance of 4 meters using OFDM modulation. The 
designed system supports the connectivity upto 10 meters 
of distance between the solar panel and transmitter. The 
project has been successfully completed. 
9.4.9. Designing Reliable and Low-latency Networks 
for Tactile Cyber-Physical Systems
ERNET India jointly with Indian Institute of Science (IISc) 
Bangalore is executing a project on “Designing Reliable 
and Low-latency Networks for Tactile Cyber-Physical 
Systems”, funded by MeitY, with an objective to design and 
implement Tactile Cyber-Physical System that addresses 
the challenges of achieving real-time interaction between 
physical and virtual worlds in prominent applications like 
teleoperation and virtual reality that require ultra-reliable 
low latency communications (URLLC). 
WAN link setup between ERNET Chennai and Bengaluru 
has been configured with DSCP Expedite Forwarding 
(EF) strategies for transmitting both priority flows and best 
effort flows. The WAN link configurations are currently 
being experimentally evaluated with the Geomagic Touch 
(Haptic) device setup at one end (ERNET Chennai) and 
robotic arm at other end (IISc Bangalore). Further, the 
IEEE TSN strategies developed under the project are 
evaluated in the end-to-end network for demonstration 
with teleoperation or AR/VR use case using haptic device 
and robotic arm.
Haptics application demonstration between ERNET 
Chennai and IISc Bangalore
9.4.10. 
Network 
Management 
Innovation 
and 
Experimentation with MAQAN
ERNET India through the “Network management, 
innovation and experimentation with MAQAN” project 
funded by MeitY joined the MAQAN initiative executed 
between IIT Madras, C-DAC and SETS.
ERNET India is hosting the quantum key distribution 
node and actively participating in experimental work 
using the MAQAN testbed. MAQAN fiber links has been 
established between IITM, ERNET India, SETS and NIC, 
and the testbed links are being monitored regularly. A 
new 2-core fiber cable has been laid between SETS and 
NIC for extending the MAQAN testbed to NIC. There 
is an additional Free Space Optics (FSO) classical 
communication link between 6th floor Electrical Science 
Block at IITM and D-Block 9th floor at ERNET India at 
IITM-RP is being established as part of the MAQAN. 
The MAQAN network links are being monitored using 
Optical Time-Domain Reflectometer (OTDR) traces 
by integrating the NMSWorks OTDR device for live 
monitoring of the OFC cable and the dashboard to 
view the real time OTDR integrated with Q-SDN 
software. ERNET India is also contributing to standards 
through TSDSI SGSS study item on “Interoperability of 
multivendor QKD node using SDN’.
9.4.11. Quantum Key Distribution-based Ultra-Secure 
and Reliable Optical Networks using Shared Fiber 
Topology
ERNET India jointly with IIT Indore and NSUT Delhi 
is executing MeitY funded project on “Quantum Key 
Distribution-based Ultra-Secure and Reliable Optical 
Networks using Shared Fiber Topology”, from Aug 2023 
to Dec 2025. The objective of the project is to analyze a 
physical layer model of a quantum channel integrated with 
the existing optical networks, demonstrate co-existence 
of quantum and classical data channels, investigate 
new disaster aware strategies for providing survivability 
against natural disasters in optical networks integrated 
with QKD, and strategies for optimal placement of trusted 
repeater nodes (TRNs) in a metro area network. 
Simulation of the BB84 quantum key distribution (QKD) 
protocol using IBM Qiskit is in progress to explore 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
219
the impact of noise in a quantum channel. Further, 
the classical channel can be simulated by adding 
different noise models that could result from classical 
communication. The goal is to multiplex quantum and 
classical data into a single optical fiber and analyze 
how noise and potential security attacks affect quantum 
information. Once the simulation is complete, calculation 
of key performance metrics such as Quantum Bit Error 
Rate (QBER), secret key rate, and yield. These metrics 
helps in understanding the channel’s resilience to noise 
and its security performance under practical conditions.
Proposed architecture of QKD-secured  
Optical Networks
9.4.12. Advanced Optical Communication Testbed –
QKD Network Security
ERNET is a member of the IIT Madras led “Advance 
Optical 
Communication 
(AOC) 
testbed” 
project 
consortium. The AOC testbed is funded by DoT under 
the Telecom Technology Development Fund for the 
duration of 2 years from Oct 2023 to Oct 2025. 
ERNET Work Package (WP15) focuses on the QKD 
Network Security. In collaboration with CDOT and 
MAQAN project partners, ERNET India will add 
additional QKD node to the existing MAQAN testbed. 
As part of the project various security attack scenarios 
will be emulated and suitable mitigation strategies will be 
developed. One of the goals of the project is to develop 
SDN-enabled path control methods in the event of link 
failures due to security attacks such as Trojan horse and 
fibre tampering.
ERNET India has signed an MoU with C-DOT for 
the collaboration under the AOC testbed project. In 
consultation with C-DOT, the technical specifications for 
the nodes belonging to Alice, Bob, and Eve have been 
finalized for the QKD security system architecture. The 
integration test for combining the C-DOT QKD node with 
the MAQAN testbed has been successfully completed, 
and the integration process will be fully finalized during 
the deployment of the C-DOT’s QKD node. For the 
testbed, the Eve node supports two attack scenarios: 
the Trojan Horse attack and the Fiber Tampering attack. 
An experimental work has been carried out in terms of 
QBER, SKR, and click rate. 
Further, involving secured optical path provisioning using 
SDN has been initiated. Initially, link failure scenarios 
will be identified, and software tools/frameworks will 
be developed for path provisioning to provide alternate 
paths when QBER increases. Also, ERNET India will 
be contributing to QKD standardization study items at 
TSDSI. 
9.4.13. A Comprehensive IoT Security Ecosystem 
and Sandbox
ERNET India executing a MeitY funded project on “A 
Comprehensive IoT Security Ecosystem and Sandbox”, 
executed jointly with C-DAC, IIT Madras, IIT Bombay, 
IIIT Bangalore, SETS and Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham. 
The objective of the project is to develop an IoT Sandbox 
Environment for validating the functionality and security 
of IoT devices and networks. It will involve creating 
indigenous hardware and software tools, such as libraries, 
scripts, and evaluation methodologies, to thoroughly 
assess IoT systems. Further, a Sandbox will be set 
up as a demonstration hub to showcase the tools as a 
facility and for collaboration. ERNET will be contributing 
for functional validation of IoT device like network layer 
protocol analysis, application layer analysis and basic 
cloud interfacing.
9.4.14. Work Based Learning (WBL) programme 
to strengthen and empower SC/ST/Women/EWS 
graduate engineers
ERNET is one of the Implementing Organization in the 
MeitY funded ‘Work Based Learning (WBL) programme 
to 
strengthen 
and 
empower 
SC/ST/Women/EWS 
graduate engineers through MeitY institutions’ led by 
C-DAC Mohali, for duration of 5 years from April 2022 
to March 2027.Under this program, 6 months paid 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
220
Internship is offered to the candidates under selected 
categories. Overall, ERNET across its three regional 
centres (Delhi, Chennai and Bangalore) will provide 
opportunity to 180 WBL beneficiaries over the 5 year 
project period (36 Interns per annum). So far, 70 WBL 
interns were benefitted under this programme working 
on various ongoing project initiatives.
9.5	
National Informatics Centre (NIC)
9.5.1 About National Informatics Centre (https://
www.nic.in)
NIC under the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (MeitY) is the technology partner of the 
Government of India. NIC was established in 1976 with 
the objective to provide technology-driven solutions to 
Central and State Governments.
NIC MANDATE:
 
Technology partner of the Government
 
Design and Develop IT Systems for the Government
 
Provide ICT Infrastructure to the Government
 
Explore & Advise on use of Emerging Technologies
Since its inception, NIC has been a driving force for digital 
advancements that promote sustainable development. 
With over 47 years of experience, NIC has played a 
crucial role in providing support for Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) and eGovernance.
9.5.2 Network Services
9.5.2.1	 NICNET
NIC Network (NICNET) backbone is fully upgraded to 
multiple 10 Gbps capacity with sufficient redundancy. 
NIC States are connected through multiples of 10 Gbps 
links and NIC District Centres are connected with 34/100 
Mbps links with redundancy built at State and District links. 
Last mile redundancy for NICNET has been extended 
to a greater number of districts, with primary links from 
BSNL and secondary links from RailTel/PGCIL. Most of 
the Bhawan Links at Delhi are upgraded from 100 Mbps 
to 1 / 10 Gbps depending upon the requirement.
Through the creation of NICNET, the ICT Network, NIC 
has established connections with Central Government 
Ministries/Departments, 36 State Governments/Union 
Territories, and more than 758 District administrations 
in India, aligning itself with the goals of the Digital India 
program.
Direct peering of NICNET with BSNL, PGCIL and RailTel 
are completed at Delhi and Hyderabad for saving Internet 
Bandwidth and faster access of each other’s Network and 
Data Centre. Peering with Google, Microsoft, Facebook, 
and Akamai Content Delivery Network has facilitated 
faster access to Google services and other important 
international websites. NIC network has been enabled 
to minimize delay and handle large scale important 
video conferencing such as PRAGATI and GST Council 
Meetings.
High speed Internet services are provided to all National 
Data Centres (NDCs) to ensure applications hosted 
are accessible to users across the globe with minimum 
latency. Capacity planning and upgradation of Internet 
Gateway at regular intervals has been undertaken to 
provide smooth Internet access to all NICNET users 
throughout the country. To maintain accurate timing and 
synchronization of all network elements and servers on 
the network Stratum-1 clocks are installed at Delhi and 
Hyderabad.
9.5.2.2	 NKN
The details are available in Chapter 2 at Section 2.4.2 
National Knowledge Network (NKN)
9.5.3 Data Centre & Cloud Services
9.5.3.1 Data Centre 
NIC has set up state-of-the-art National Data Centres at 
Delhi, Pune, Bhubaneswar, and Hyderabad to provide 
cloud services to various central and state Government 
Ministries, departments, and PSU etc. at all levels. These 
Data Centres combine round-the-clock operations and 
management of systems with onsite skilled personnel. 
These Data Centres are designed to provide a full 
stream of hosting services which extend from physical to 
shared hosting, dedicated servers with managed hosting 
solutions to infrastructure services like collocation & 
bandwidth, Disaster Recovery (DR) etc. Many missions 
critical applications/web sites of various State and 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
221
Central Government departments are hosted at these 
Data Centres.
At the National Data Centre, the storage capacity was 
augmented, and the capacity has been increased to 
approx. 100PB. It includes All Flash Enterprise Class 
Storage, Object storage, Unified storage etc. Around 
5000 odd servers are being used for various cloud 
workloads. NDC Delhi and NDC Bhubaneswar are ISO 
27001:2013 certified.
Another state-of-the-Art National Data Centre (Tier-III) of 
200 Racks expandable to 400 Racks is being established 
at Guwahati, Assam. The non-IT infrastructure is nearing 
completion and for ICT establishment a work order has 
been issued to the selected MSP.  This National Data 
Centre is expected to be operational by 2025.
Presently, National Data Centres of NIC/NICSI at Delhi, 
Hyderabad, Pune, and Bhubaneswar are dedicated to 
host NIC National Cloud under the umbrella of Meghraj 
Cloud, a Government of India initiative which has been 
providing a wide range of services which include but not 
limited to IaaS, PaaS and SaaS, which can be used to 
host websites, portals, web & mobile applications. NIC 
Cloud Service offers various services including virtual 
servers, Kubernetes containers, DevOps and provides 
hosting support to all types of applications. This allows 
cloud users to avail the services from multiple locations 
as per their choice and prepare the DR setup. In recent 
years, government organizations have been adopting 
cloud technologies and hosting their ICT applications 
on cloud platforms. NIC National Cloud is the de facto 
platform to host any applications & workloads. To 
further enhance cloud capacity from NDCs at Delhi, 
Pune, Bhubaneswar and Hyderabad, managed service 
providers have been on-boarded in the PPP model. 
Under this initiative    Cloud Services in pay-as-you-
use model have been made operational from 2 NDCs 
(Bhubaneswar and Hyderabad) already.
9.5.3.2	  Cloud Services
NIC launched National Cloud Services in 2014 under 
Megh Raj Government of India Cloud Initiative. NIC 
Cloud Services are being provided from multiple 
locations of the National Data Centre. Container as a 
Service and multiple Artificial Intelligence based services 
are now offered on NIC Cloud platform such as External 
Endpoints, Software as a Service, WAF as a Service, Agile 
as a Service, Resource Monitoring as a Service, Data 
Analytics (DA) as a Service, Application Performance 
Management (APM) Service, Load Testing as a Service, 
AI – Manthan, AI – Tainaatee, AI – Satyapikaanan, AI – 
VANI, AI – Panini, AI – Shruti, AI-Saransh, etc.
To cater the projects envisioned under the Digital 
India program and growing requirements of existing 
Projects, over 28,855 Virtual Servers were provisioned 
and allocated to over 1917 Users/Applications for 
e-Governance Projects. 
National Informatics Centre has taken various steps to 
augment the existing Cloud Infrastructure of the National 
Data Centres (NDCs) to provide SLA based managed 
Cloud services in collaboration with industry stakeholders. 
To achieve this goal, the National Government Cloud 
(NGC) is being set up. NGC shall consolidate the cloud 
services across NDCs via a single Cloud Management 
Platform.
9.5.3.3	 Command and Control Centre
Command & Control Centre (CCC) has been operational 
at NIC HQ with the objective of providing a single window 
solution for monitoring, troubleshooting and technical 
support for applications hosted in NIC Cloud, National 
and NIC Mini Data Centers across the country. CCC has 
been providing following services:
(i)	
CDN service
(ii)	
Resource Monitoring Service
(iii)	
Application Performance Monitoring (APM)
(iv)	
NIC Assurance (Load Testing as a Service)
(v)	
Troubleshooting & technical support
(vi)	
DC service
9.5.4	 Cyber Security
Cyber Security incorporates the security standards and 
procedures followed to ensure protection of sensitive 
data, personal information, intellectual property etc. 
Multi layered access mechanisms are implemented on 
information systems for prevention from security breach 
and unauthorized access.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
222
9.5.4.1	  Network Security
During the year, the Network Security Division (NSD) 
was constantly engaged in ensuring Cyber Security of 
NICNET information infrastructure through assessment, 
planning, deployment, management and administration 
of state-of-the-art security appliances and solutions. The 
security span of NSD comprises National and State Data 
Centers, over 1000 LANs of Govt. offices and MPLS 
networks, more than 2 Lac endpoints and a series of 
networking devices deployed across the country. Multi-
layer security was provided to NICNET users with 
high availability infrastructure and specialized teams 
were deployed to work on different Layers of security. 
Critical Security Controls were maintained for effective 
cyber defense and change control management. 
Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks towards 
NIC infrastructure were prevented using Anti-DDoS 
Appliances deployed at gateway level in National Data 
Centers (NDCs). Network Firewalls are being used 
to provide the requisite security to the digital assets 
in NIC’s National and State Data Centers. Network 
Intrusion Prevention Systems (NIPS) were maintained 
in monitoring and blocking mode for performing deep 
packet analysis. Up-to-date signatures were applied on 
a regular basis in all IPS Sensors deployed in NICNET 
across the country. Geo-fencing of applications was also 
facilitated wherever it was needed.
As a part of enhancing endpoint security, the Host 
Intrusion Prevention System (HIPS) solution was 
deployed in server systems in National Data Centers. 
Next Generation Antivirus solutions with AI & ML, 
Endpoint Detection & Response (EDR) and Sandboxing 
for malware analysis were deployed in client and server 
systems in NICNET. Necessary support was provided 
to server owners to fix the vulnerabilities and improve 
the VA score so that the applications can be securely 
deployed. Audit of Network and Security devices was 
conducted at National Data Centers, State Data Centers 
and various State & Bhawan networks.
The 24×7 Security Monitoring Centre was constantly 
engaged in identifying suspicious activities towards 
NICNET based on real time log correlation using SIEM 
solution. Several awareness programs and capacity 
building programs were conducted on Cyber Security.
9.5.4.2	 NIC-CERT
NIC-CERT has been set up with the objective of 
creating 
a 
comprehensive 
security 
and 
incident 
response framework that integrates world class security 
components and inbuilt threat intelligence for detection, 
prevention and incident management. Using the tools, 
the team monitors and correlates events that would help 
in generating a canvas of the attack surface and identify 
the vulnerabilities and possible exploits.
KEY INITIATIVES: 
• 
Continuous analysis of logs and traffic patterns 
enabled early detection and mitigation of critical 
vulnerabilities. A Unified Intelligence Platform 
was rolled out for monitoring of Dark web/Deep 
web, Social media, mobile Apps and for brand 
monitoring & protection.
• 
NIC-CERT integrated the Threat Intelligence 
Platform (TIP) into its security operations, 
significantly boosting its ability to identify and 
analyze threats in real time. 
• 
The team played a crucial role in securing 
government 
IT 
infrastructure 
by 
real-time 
monitoring and effectively managing over 43,328 
cybersecurity incidents, minimizing downtime and 
mitigating risks to sensitive data.
• 
NIC-CERT 
conducted 
multiple 
workshops, 
webinars, and training sessions for government 
employees covering topics such as phishing attack 
prevention, safe browsing practices, and secure 
handling of digital resources.
• 
Strengthening collaboration with other national 
and international CERTs, NIC-CERT facilitated the 
exchange of threat intelligence to combat emerging 
cyber threats.
• 
To bolster preparedness, NIC-CERT conducted 
simulated cyberattacks as a part of red teaming 
and regular vulnerability assessments across 
critical government systems were conducted. 
• 
The deployment of the DHRISTI (Dynamic 
Holistic Real-time Identification System for Threat 
Intelligence) framework marked a significant 
milestone in threat analytics.

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
223
During the year, NIC-CERT has ensured round the clock 
Cyber Security of NICNET in general and National and 
State Data Centres in particular during the year. The 
NIC-CERT team was constantly engaged in monitoring 
alerts from security appliances and solutions deployed in 
its security span comprising various Data Centres, over 
1000 LANs of Govt. offices and MPLS networks, more 
than 2 Lakh endpoints and a series of networking devic-
es deployed across the country. The centre was opera-
tional 24x7, functioned uninterrupted during the period 
and took care of real time monitoring, detection, preven-
tion, analysis and reporting of cyber threats and attacks. 
Asset owners were alerted on attack attempts and reme-
dial measures were suggested on a regular basis.
9.5.4.3	 Application Security
Security Audit of hosted Web Applications / Websites 
is taken up as per the NIC Security Audit policy. The 
Security Audit activity comprises Source Code Analysis, 
Automated scanning and Manual Audit process. Periodic 
Audits in the form of Post deployment vulnerability. 
Testing (Penetration Testing) and Vulnerability Analysis, 
SSL compliance testing, Version. Detection for the 
application hosting environment with infrastructure 
compliance checks are also undertaken. Response 
provided to Application Security issues received through 
RTI, Parliament questions, grievance, and LEAs. 
Capacity building programmes for NIC, Government 
officials in the Information Security domain are taken up 
on a regular basis. 
NIC has also been spearheading the Comprehensive 
Security Audit of 112 critical ICT applications/Databases 
of the government based on a 282 pointers checklist.
9.5.4.4	 NIC VPN (Virtual Private Network)
Virtual Private Network is a secure method of connecting 
remote users to their private and corporate networks 
over the Internet.
NIC’s VPN service is used by Government officials, 
Central and State Government departments, PSUs, 
and Autonomous bodies under Central and State 
Governments to
a)	
access e-governance applications and
b)	
update their web sites and remotely manage the 
servers hosted in NIC’s Data Centers.
 
• 
Web VPN: Web Based Users (application 
access): 6,00,000+
 
• 
Remote access: Client Based users (Server 
Management): 20,000+
 
• 
Site to site Users: 80+
VPN Services provided to:
• 
50+ Central Ministries and 500+ its Departments, 
all State Government and its Departments and 
700 Collectors, 187 Indian missions abroad, 
Intelligence agencies etc.
• 
Total applications on boarded: 550 +
• 
Average no. of connections per day: 60,000+
• 
Average time spent on VPN per day: 3-4 hours
• 
Uptime of service: 99.9 %
9.5.5	  Web, Messaging and Support Services
9.5.5.1 Gov.in Domain Registration Service (https://
registry.gov.in/)
The National Informatics Centre (NIC) is the sole authority 
responsible for registering domain names under the Gov.
in domain, ensuring that the allocation process complies 
with the guidelines set forth by the Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology (MeitY). Domain names 
are not limited to English; they can also be registered in 
various official regional languages, using Internationalized 
Domain Names (IDN), which promotes the development 
of fully localized websites—from the domain name to 
the site’s content—in different languages. This is a key 
step toward enhancing accessibility and inclusivity for 
regional users.
The entire domain registration process is conducted 
through NIC’s registry portal. Applicants can log in to 
the portal and complete the registration process online, 
benefiting from various features, including the e-Sign 
facility. Currently, there are 5,026 of total Active Domain 
(3rd level) 1,45,224 of Total Active domain at 4th level 
(Registered under 3rd level Domain Hosted in NIC).

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
224
9.5.5.2	 Email
E-mail serves as the backbone of all e-Governance 
initiatives in the country. The service was implemented 
by NIC and has been massively used by both Center 
and State Governments. The service provides 24×7×365 
support to a user base of more than 33 lakh officials under 
Ministries/ Departments/ Statutory bodies/ Autonomous 
bodies of both Central and State/ UT Governments. 
The prominent features supported by the service are 
multi-lingual support, Internationalized Domain Name 
(IDN), Standardized Official Template, User Persona, 
Video Conferencing Integration, Undo Send, Briefcase 
etc. The security features offered in the service are 
Multifactor Authentication, Geo-fencing, Device Mapping, 
Mail encryption etc. 
9.5.5.3	 Messaging services (SMS, WhatsApp, IVR)
NIC SMS gateway, hosted at NDC Delhi and Hyderabad, 
provides PUSH PULL SMS services. It is a TRAI 
TCCCP regulation 2018 complaint. There are 3738 
applications integrated, which send 8 to 9 crore SMS 
per day to citizens as well as international subscribers. 
Major applications include, UIDAI, GSTN, UMANG, 
DigiLocker, Parichay, UWIN, Bharat Ke Veer, MyGov, 
CGHS, EPFO, Courts, Sansad, PMO etc. On an average 
18 SMS campaigns per month have been executed for 
information dissemination and citizen engagement like 
Rozgar Mela, Yuva Pratibha, Digital India Week, Garib 
Kalyan MahaQuiz, Chandrayaan Quiz, Trinity Quiz, 
UPSC, Cooperative Society, PPC etc. The gateway is 
integrated with all major TSP (telecom service providers) 
with a combined bandwidth of 26000 TPS (transaction 
per second). In 2024, till the writing of this report 3053 
crore SMS were transacted. NIC SMS gateway delivers 
more than 90% of SMS and 95% of OTP SMS, which is 
at par with industry standards.
NIC SMS Gateway also provides voice services like OBD 
(Out Bound Dialing) and Miss Call services. Total around 
10 crore missed calls have been generated by citizens 
accessing various services like EPFO, UMANG, MNRE, 
eKAMAAN etc. Similarly, 3.4 crore OBD made under 
MyGov, Punjab Grievance, Mera Aaspatal, MyBharat, 
CM Office Haryana etc. This resulted in more than 53 
crore seconds duration voice calls to citizens. 30+ 
departments onboarded for WhatsApp service. In 2024, 
19.80 crore messages were shared. 
9.5.5.4	 Single Sign on Parichay
Single sign-on (SSO) is a centralized session and user 
authentication service in which one set of login credentials 
can be used to access multiple applications. 
Parichay: SSO framework for the Government to 
Government (G2G) Services along with an added 
layer of security by providing a strong authentication 
mechanism.
Parichay application allows the user to access multiple 
applications through single sign-on. Once the user login 
to the Parichay application, all the applications that 
comply with Parichay integration will be auto logged in 
by sharing Parichay sessions. After login to Parichay, 
the user can move seamlessly between two or more 
applications.
Jan Parichay (Meri Pehchaan): SSO framework for 
Citizen-Centric (G2C) Services that authenticates 
user using any of the user identifier like Email/ Mobile/
Aadhaar/PAN/Other Government Ids
9.5.5.5	 Government 
Instant 
Messaging 
System 
(GIMS) - Sandes
SANDES stands as a secure and indigenous open-
source instant messaging platform developed by the 
National Informatics Centre (NIC). It is designed to 
facilitate communication between government entities 
(G2G) and between the government and citizens (G2C) 
with a strong focus on security and privacy. Every 
message within Sandes is encrypted end-to-end (E2EE) 
for enhanced protection. The key features of Sandes 
encompass one-on-one and group chat functionality, 
audio and video calls for both individual and group 
conversations, seamless contact synchronization with 
your phone’s address book, the ability to share media 
files and message broadcasting. The Sandes adheres 
to the Social Media Intermediary Guidelines and the 
government’s Privacy and Data Retention policy, 
ensuring compliance with official regulations.
This versatile platform is actively used by various 
government ministries and state departments, including 
Delhi Police, Defense Production, AIIMS, BSF, and 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
225
more. Additionally, it has been seamlessly integrated 
with a range of e-Governance applications, such as 
ICJS, NIC email, eOffice, DigiLocker, PFMS etc. for 
secure messaging, alerts, and the delivery of one-time 
passwords (OTP). The Sandes App is readily available 
on both the Play Store and the App Store, making it 
easily accessible to authorized users.
9.5.5.6	 Service Desk
NIC Service Desks (NSD) has been steadfast in its 
mission to provide a single-window platform for resolving 
issues related to a wide range of services offered by NIC. 
NSD serves as the Single Point of Contact (SPOC) for 
government entities, statutory bodies, and the general 
public, enabling them to raise queries, calls, complaints, 
and suggestions for any issues they encounter in their 
day-to-day activities with different NIC services.
Image: Showing request low of the NIC Service Desk
NSD enables 24×7 support through a toll-free call center 
(1800111555) and a user-friendly web portal (https://
servicedesk.nic.in), where complaints related to any NIC 
services can be effortlessly lodged.
9.5.6	 Video Conferencing Technologies and Services
9.5.6.1 Video Conferencing Services
NIC provides video-conferencing services from more 
than 2700+ videoconferencing studios spread across 
the country which includes all Central Ministries/
Departments, State & District Hqrs., Union Territories, 
etc. Video conferencing infrastructure over NICNET has 
been strengthened by augmenting with state-of-the-art 
technology as per latest technological trends keeping in 
pace with the international standards. 
NIC’s video-conferencing services are being used for 
monitoring of various Government Projects, Schemes, 
Public Grievances, monitoring of law and order, 
Hearings of RTI cases, Tele-education, Tele-medicine 
and launching of new projects/schemes etc. NIC is also 
providing state of the art cloud-based video conferencing 
solutions, which enables services from Anywhere, 
Anytime, and Any network. 
NIC has also developed an in-house webinar 
application by integrating with BharatVC and 
webcast streaming application. This is being used to 
organize training programs, workshops, seminars and 
other official events.
NIC’s video-conferencing services are being extensively 
used by highest dignitary of the country i.e. Hon’ble 
President of India, Hon’ble Vice President of India, 
Hon’ble Prime Minister of India, Union Ministers, 
Governors, and Chief Ministers of States, Cabinet 
Secretary, 
Chief 
Secretaries, 
Chief 
Election 
Commissioner, Chief Information Commissioner and 
various other senior officials across the country.
During the year, about 2.60 lakh multi-site video 
conferencing sessions were conducted with more than 
23.13 participants in 14.75 lakh site hours.
9.5.6.2	 Webcast & Webinar Services
NIC has been providing webcast services for the last two 
decades. NIC webcast services cover events like Union 
Budget, President and Prime Minister’s addresses, 
Prime Minister’s Mann ki Baat, Independence Day 
and Republic Day celebration (New Delhi), PIB Press 
conferences, Army and Air force day celebrations, State 
Assemblies proceedings etc.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
226
9.5.7 Geospatial Technology and Services (https://
mapservice.gov.in/, https://stategisportal.gov.in/ )
1.	
BHARAT MAPS (https://bharatmaps.gov.in/)
 
To fulfill the objectives of Digital India and to 
establish end to end geospatial electronic delivery 
systems as part of National GIS Mission Mode 
Project, GIS Platform was established by NIC 
using NICMAPS Services. It has been revamped 
as “BHARAT MAPS”. This depicts core foundation 
data as “NICMAPS”, an integrated multi-scale, 
multi-resolution base map service using reference 
data from Survey of India, ISRO, FSI, RGI and so 
on. This encompasses a large number of layers 
containing administrative boundaries, transport 
layers such as roads & railways, forest layer, 
settlement locations etc., Service offerings include 
India specific Basemap services, updated Admin 
boundary database, coding and reverse geocoding 
services and All-India rural focused navigation 
services. 
2.	
Map Service Portal (https://mapservice.gov.in/)
	
Map Services are being provided to various 
ministries and departments through the map 
services platform. About 250 applications are using 
these services. 
3.	
State GIS Portal (https://stategisportal.nic.in/)
	
STATE GIS PORTAL empowered by BharatMaps 
is a simplified user interface for all the states and 
union territories of India. Six Centers of Excellence 
in GIS have been established in Madhya Pradesh, 
Tamil Nadu, Odisha, Bihar, Andhra Pradesh, and 
Assam. They are also offering GIS services to 
various departments.
4.	
Survey of Villages Abadi and Mapping with 
Improvised 
Technology 
in 
Village 
Areas 
(SVAMITVA) (https://svamitva.nic.in/ , https://
grammanchitra.gov.in/)
	
SVAMITVA Dashboard Application provides role-
based access to update status on Key Performance 
Indicators of SVAMITVA scheme dealing with 
drone survey of village Aabadi areas and activities 
involved there on resulting in Property card 
generation and distribution. The key stakeholders 
are the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Survey of 
India, State Govts and NIC. The Portal was also 
used to distribute property cards to beneficiaries 
through SMS. The drone data which is generated 
under SVAMITVA project being integrated with 
GramManchitra application for rural planning.
5.	
Parivesh GIS Portal (https://parivesh.nic.in/.)
	
Geospatial division is playing an important role in 
another flagship project PARIVESH for the Ministry 
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change where 
GIS based decision support is integrated in the 
workflow of Clearance process from Stakeholder 
level to decision authority level.
6.	
Power Portal (https://indiapowermap.gov.in)
	
India power portal is a GIS based web application 
for mapping and analysis of electricity infrastructure. 
This project aims at mapping the existing assets 
and planning for new assets under various 
schemes in REC and IPDS under the ministry of 
power for strategic decisions. 
7.	
GIS For Financial Inclusion (https://dbtgis.nic.
in)
 
DBT-GIS is an application of mapping of financial 
infrastructure across the country to facilitate 
financial inclusion of rural masses so that Direct 
Benefit Transfer can reach the unreached. This 
application captures, edits, views and analyzes 
the financial services touch points and its service 
delivery to six lakhs plus villages of the country. 
8.	
School GIS (https://schoolgis.nic.in)
	
School GIS project has been undertaken for the 
Department of School Education and Literacy 
under the Ministry of Education to visualize and 
analyze the GPS data of school locations collated 
from various State Government Departments on 
the National GIS Platform established at NIC.
Geo-Spatial Technology and Services also plays a 
crucial role in the management and planning of utility 
service systems. Utility Service Systems includes Global 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
227
Positioning System, CORS, Topographic/Cadastral 
Mapping, UAV / drone survey Photogrammetry and 
AM/ FM/GIS. One Map Series has been launched for 
cities wherein all city level modules like plot information, 
Utility workflow management, Solid Waste management, 
Vehicle Tracking and Road information are incorporated. 
Some of the major projects accomplished in this financial 
year are One Map Greater Noida Geo portal, One Map 
Noida Geo portal, Mega City Portal, Delhi Jal Board, 
E-Dharti web and Goa State Urban Development Agency 
(GSUDA).
9.5.8	 ICT Solutions for Northeastern Region
Project Monitoring System (PMS) for monitoring progress 
of projects under various schemes has been implemented 
by the Ministry of Development of Northeastern Region 
(MDoNER).
A.	
POORVOTTAR 
SAMPARK 
SETU 
(https://
nesetu.mdoner.gov.in/)
	
Hon’ble 
MoS, 
MDoNER, 
launched 
the 
‘POORVOTTAR SAMPARK SETU’, a powerful 
portal to manage Minister’s visits to NER, 
more effective, transparent and impactful. The 
portal provides valuable insights and graphical 
information about State wise/ District wise visits to 
NER. 
B.	
DoNER 
Analytics 
Dashboard 
(https://
dashboard.mdoner.gov.in/)
	
Portal show cases 828 KPIs of 143 GOI schemes 
from 51 GOI Ministry /Department covering 6 major 
sectors.
C.	
POORVOTTAR VIKAS SETU – Pre-Sanction 
(https://nesetu.mdoner.gov.in/vikassetu/)
	
This Portal is a tool for complete project life 
cycle broadly classified under pre-sanction and 
post-sanction. Portal assists in monitoring the 
implementation of the Projects pertaining to the 
North Eastern Region commencing from the 
submission of the Project Proposal in the form of 
Concept Note & DPR until the completion of the 
Project.
D.	
POORVOTTAR VIKAS SETU – Post Sanction 
(https://ne.pmgatishakti.gov.in/DoNER/login)
	
PM Gati Shakti portal in addition to GIS mapping 
of the projects has been customized to act as 
a Project Monitoring System (PMS) for all the 
MDoNER projects. In this portal around 3579 
projects of various schemes of MDoNER are 
present and monitoring the implementation and 
progress of projects & updation of data related to 
all those projects is carried out.
E.	
Projects 
Dashboard 
(https://mdoner.gov.in/
dashboard/)
	
This is the Projects Dashboard, which shows 
the details related to all the projects, which are 
implemented by MDoNER and NEC. 
F.	
10% GBS MIS (https://nesetu.mdoner.gov.in/
gbs/)
	
The main purpose of this portal is to monitor the 
financial expenditure made by 54 non-exempted 
ministries.
9.5.9	 Innovation and IPR
Intellectual Property & Know-How Informatics Division 
takes care of IPR Management of NIC-developed 
software solutions with particular emphasis on Copyright 
Registration and Trademark Protection. 
NIC’s IPR Profile
•	
Total Copyrights Registered - 95.
•	
In 2024 Registered – 5, Applications pending at 
Copyright Office - 1, Under Process (in house) - 1
•	
Total Trademarks Registered - 1 Trademark in the 
USA; Trademark of 10 NIC Logos; Trademark of 
NIC Application Logos Applied for - 7
•	
Total Patents Granted - 1 Patent in the USA; In 
2022; 1 Patent for Jal Tarangini applied by NIC 
Assam in 2024
9.5.10 eGovernance Services and Products
NIC is playing an instrumental role in executing key 
IT projects, in close collaboration with Central and 
State Governments, making the last-mile delivery of 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
228
government services to the citizens a reality, through a 
variety of digital solutions. NIC endeavors to cater to ICT 
needs at all levels of governance including central, state, 
districts, judiciary, and legislative layer.
9.5.10.1 eOffice (https://eoffice.gov.in)
eOffice is one of the key IT projects of NIC, aimed 
at improving internal efficiencies in an organization 
through electronic administration leading to informed 
and quicker decision making, which in turn results in 
better public service delivery. It is a complete digital 
workplace solution for Government offices and is based 
on the Central Secretariat Manual of Office Procedure 
(CSMOP), formulated by Department of Administrative 
Reforms and Public Grievances (DAR&PG).
The eOffice analytics dashboard facilitates ministries/
departments to view the progress on delayering, receipt 
pendency and inter-ministerial movement of files status 
on the eOffice analytics dashboard. 
Kanthastha is a translation utility built by Rajbhasha 
Vibhag & C-DAC with eOffice for translation of content 
written in English to Hindi & vice-versa. 
9.5.10.2 My Gov
A platform for citizens’ Engagement towards Good 
Governance (https://www.mygov.in/)
The MyGov platform has successfully empowered 
citizens by providing them with a direct voice in the 
governance process. It has established a framework that 
enables citizens to actively participate as stakeholders, 
not only in policy formulation but also in implementation 
through actionable tasks and meaningful discussions. 
In the year 2024-25, the MyGov platform reached 
494.59+ lakh registered users, with 117 episodes of 
‘Mann Ki Baat’ aired. The portal is now accessible 
in 11 languages. MyGov operates in 24 State/UT 
instances, including Chandigarh, Himachal Pradesh, 
Haryana, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, Rajasthan, and others, 
ensuring wide citizen engagement across the country.
9.5.10.3 India Portal
The India Portal started in 2005 as a mission mode project 
under the National e-Governance Plan. The aim was to 
serve as a single window for government information 
and services, promote standards for e-governance, and 
encourage innovative digital initiatives.
Initiatives/activities under the aegis of India Portal 
are:
•	
National Portal of India (https://www.india.gov.
in)
	
National Portal of India (NPI) provides single 
window access to government information and 
services for citizens, businesses, overseas Indians 
etc. Over the years, NPI has successfully met its 
goals to promote e-governance and encourage 
technology innovation. The India Portal has over 
28.9 million visitors (65 million-page views) and 
10.78 Lakh registered users.
•	
National Government Services Portal (NGSP) 
(https://services.india.gov.in)
	
The National Government Services Portal (NGSP) 
serves as a centralized hub for services provided 
by various government entities. The portal lists 
over 13871 services that can be searched by 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
229
categories and has over 43.4 million visitors (97.6 
million-page views).
•	
Integrated Government Online Directory (iGOD) 
(https://igod.gov.in)
	
The integrated iGOD platform serves as the central 
directory of websites of government entities at all 
levels. It comes equipped with various filters, and 
categories that have been thoughtfully designed to 
streamline the process of accessing government 
websites.
•	
Guidelines for Indian Government Websites 
(GIGW) (https://guidelines.india.gov.in)
	
Launched in February 2023, GIGW 3.0 is a 
collaborative effort with STQC and Cert-In. This 
updated version prioritizes Security, Accessibility, 
Quality and Lifecycle management. It has the 
responsibility of the three stakeholders viz. 
Organization, Developer, Evaluator with respect to 
each guideline and the risk associated with non-
compliances.
•	
Know India Portal (https://knowindia.india.gov.
in)
	
The Know India Portal celebrates our nation’s rich 
cultural tapestry, offering a glimpse into India’s 
soul. It serves as a repository of our heritage, 
symbols, and traditions, allowing users to explore 
our country’s cultural diversity, unique traditions, 
and more. 
9.5.10.4 S3WaaS
S3WaaS (Secure, Scalable and Sugamya Website as a 
Service) developed by the National Informatics Centre 
(NIC) helps government entities to generate Secure, 
Scalable, and Sugamya (Accessible) websites. It allows 
government entities to select from various certified 
templates and offers easy customization and content 
management, enabling them to maintain their online 
presence and publish citizen-centric information with 
minimal effort and technical expertise. 
S3WaaS offers GIGW 3.0 conformant responsive 
design, secure hosting within NIC Data Centres, and 
automated updates, all contributing to an enhanced 
user experience. Additionally, it supports multilingual 
content in 18 official languages, catering to a diverse 
audience, particularly those who prefer using websites 
in their regional language. S3WaaS integrates smoothly 
with social media platforms, making information access 
and sharing easier for stakeholders. The platform is 
also integrated with Parichay Single Sign-On (SSO) 
simplifying user access across systems.
S3WaaS has been implemented and adopted by 659 
District websites, 36 NIC state centres, 135+ Ministries 
and State Departments (including Maharashtra and 
Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities), 
11 Raj Bhavans/State portals and 50 e-Counselling 
portals. The Supreme Court of India website and 723 
District Courts websites have also been migrated. The 
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (KVS), under the Ministry 
of Education, which manages schools in India and abroad, 
is in the process of migrating its 1300+ websites to the 
S3WaaS platform. As of now, 930+ websites have been 
successfully migrated, including the KVS Headquarters 
website, five Zonal websites, 25 Regional websites, and 
900+ Individual School websites.
9.5.10.5 OGD-Open Government Data 2.0 (https://
data.gov.in)
MeitY under the aegis of National Data Sharing and 
Accessibility Policy (NDSAP) initiated Open Government 
Data (OGD) Platform India, to share government data 
with its citizens. The Platform has been set-up and 
managed by the National Informatics Centre (NIC).
OGD 2.0 - Micro Services Based Architecture Leveraging 
Cloud Technology has been initiated from May 2020. The 
Platform provides Government to Government (G2G) 
service by allowing Ministries/Departments/ States/
Organizations to publish and manage their datasets on 
the Platform through a Chief Data Officer (CDO). The 
datasets are available to all free of cost. 
OGD India has 5,05,060 dataset/resources, 12,462 
catalogs, 3,321 Visualizations created, and 2,62,052 
Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) created. 
OGD India has 36.89 million times viewed and 10.56 
million times datasets have been downloaded.
9.5.10.6 Electronic transaction Aggregation and 
Analysis layer (eTaal) (https://etaal.gov.in)
eTaal 3.0 aims to measure qualitative aspects of eService 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
230
delivery, enabling performance comparisons across 
Central Ministries, States, Union Territories, and Smart 
Cities, down to the district level. It also incorporates 
AI-enabled chatbots, predictive analysis, and Business 
Intelligence (BI) dashboards for generating meaningful 
insights.
Achievements:
• 
4,317 eServices have been integrated since the 
launch of the eTaal portal.
• 
1,022 eServices integrated with granularity upto 
district level.
• 
As of 31 December 2024, a total of 10,3913 Cr. 
eTransactions have been recorded.
• 
Currently, a total of 93.33 Cr. eTransactions are 
being recorded daily.
• 
Currently, a total of 90.44 cr eTransactions are 
being recorded daily
• 
Users can access 15+ types of analytical reports 
on the eTaal 3.0 website
• 
Qualified eServices on a 9-parameter Key 
Performing Indicator (KPI) framework. Each 
eService is evaluated and scored on parameters 
such as Use of Digital Signatures, ePayment 
integration, Implementation of Mobile Application, 
Local Language Interface, Application Security 
Audit, Accessibility etc. 
9.5.10.7 Gov.in Secure Intranet Portal
The Gov.in Secure Intranet is a Government-to-Employee 
(G2E) initiative designed to enhance the efficiency of 
Government officials across Ministries and Departments, 
offering seamless access to multiple applications through 
single sign-on (SSO) without requiring separate logins. It 
provides users with features such as calendar scheduling, 
task and appointment management, and tools to monitor 
ongoing tasks assigned to individuals or teams. Reports 
and dashboards further enhance workflow oversight.
Key government applications, including Bharat VC, 
Sparrow, 
eOffice, 
and 
Bhashini, 
are 
accessible 
via the platform through SSO, streamlining user 
experience. Notifications for logins, upcoming meetings, 
appointments, and other engagements are delivered 
through email and SMS, ensuring users stay informed. 
The platform integrates with the CPGRAMS, LIMBS, RTI 
and Press Information Bureau (PIB) platforms via APIs, 
enabling users to receive the latest news and updates 
relevant to their Ministry or Department. 
9.5.10.8 CollabFiles
CollabFiles is an indigenous platform to Connect, 
Create, Share and Collaborate on Office Documents. 
It is a secured, scalable, web-based and cloud-
enabled platform to create and manage Documents, 
Spreadsheets and Presentations in a collaborative 
mode with a strategic control so that Government users 
could use it through a Secured and Privileged access of 
Parichay and JanParichay, Single-Sign-On frameworks 
of Government.
The platform is enriched with features viz.
• 
Web-based, Cloud-enabled, Secured, Scalable 
platform
• 
Create & Manage on Documents, Spreadsheets, 
Presentations and Pdfs
• 
Real-time and Asynchronous Collaboration
• 
File sharing and Access controls
• 
Integrated Messaging and Notifications
• 
Advanced File Management
• 
Dashboards for Monitoring
• 
Security and Privacy
9.5.10.9 Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) 2.0 (www.
dbtbharat.gov.in)
DBT Bharat Portal has been designed with the intention 
of monitoring the enhancement in the delivery of public 
schemes and services in India by ensuring that the 
intended beneficiary receives the in-kind and monetary 
benefits of government services and programs on time 
and efficiently. 
DBT Bharat Portal collects Data from Central Sector/CSS/
State/UT/District Schemes regarding DBT Beneficiaries 
and DBT Expenditure from implementing body like 
Ministries, Departments, States, UTs. Assessing the 
number of verified beneficiaries based on Aadhaar and 
the total amount of electronic payments are significant 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
231
key performance indicators that contribute to removal of 
duplicate or ghost beneficiaries and reduce corruption 
opportunities and middlemen. Aadhaar Authentication 
brings in transparency and accountability in the system.
APB (Aadhaar Payment Bridge) enables government 
schemes to directly transfer DBT benefits subsidies to 
beneficiaries’ bank accounts using Aadhaar as a financial 
address, reducing the chances of payment failures and 
discrepancy in recording bank account details.
9.5.10.10 
TejasVI: 
Empowering 
Data-Driven 
Governance
Tejas, a comprehensive Self-service Analytics & 
Visualization Platform, developed specifically to meet the 
data analytics and visualization needs of the Government 
Departments. Built on open-source technologies, Tejas 
provides a powerful, user-friendly, and cost-effective 
solution for processing and analyzing the extensive data 
generated by initiatives such as mission mode projects 
under the National e-Governance Plan and the numerous 
online services provided by Ministries and Departments.
Tejas stands out with its innovative data-driven 
conditional alert system, which notifies users of changes 
in data. It enhances collaboration within the NIC 
ecosystem, incorporates predictive analytics, offers real-
time data querying chatbot, and breaks down language 
barriers with multilingual support, making it a vital tool for 
fostering data-driven governance.
Tejas Features
9.5.10.11 eSamikSha 
With the help of this portal, PMO and Cabinet Secretariat 
can keep a track on all the pending work in various 
departments and direct the concerned authorities to 
take proactive steps by fastening the pace of projects as 
per expectation. The portal helps to bring transparency 
and enhance the interoperability between Government-
to-Government (G2G) and Government to Businesses 
(G2B).
One separate instance of eSamikSha has been 
implemented for Rashtrapati Bhawan (RB-eSamikSha).
9.5.10.12 Digidhan Dashboard for monitoring Digital 
Payment Transactions
The Digidhan Dashboard serves as a comprehensive 
platform for monitoring digital payment transactions 
across the country. It provides detailed statistics on 
the number and value of transactions, categorized by 
various types such as UPI, debit cards, credit cards, and 
more. Additionally, the dashboard offers insights into the 
platforms facilitating these transactions, including BHIM, 
UPI, and a range of e-wallet services. 
The platform supports the monitoring of digital payments 
across 16 distinct payment modes, such as UPI, USSD, 
IMPS, and debit cards, utilizing data from sources like 
the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), National Payments 
Corporation of India (NPCI), and over 110 public and 
private sector banks. 
9.5.10.13 Dashboard for Analytical Review of Projects 
Across Nation (DARPAN)
DARPAN 
(Dashboard 
for Analytical Review 
of 
Projects 
Across 
Nation) is a configurable 
multilingual 
product 
of NIC-UP for Hon’ble 
Governors, 
Hon’ble 
Chief Ministers, Chief 
Secretaries, 
Divisional 
Commissioners 
and 
District 
Magistrates/District 
Collectors. The Product facilitates the presentation of 
real-time data on Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) 
of selected government schemes/projects to all the 
levels (State, Division, District) of officers for planning, 
evaluation, and monitoring.
DARPAN has footprints of State/Central Ministries and 
a Data Collection Portal for PRAYAS, a dashboard of 
dashboards.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
232
Current Statistics
Dashboards
Instances
Projects
KPIs
Darpan Dashboard 
ver 1.0 (State /UTs)
12
890
3687
Darpan Dashboard 
ver 1.0 (Central 
Departments/UTs)
20
406
1347
NexGen Darpan
2
1166
7849
NexGen DARPAN 2.0
As per the feedback and requirements of various 
states and ministries, PMU-DARPAN has developed a 
lightweight DARPAN 2.0 performance Dashboard on 
an entirely new platform with latest UI/UX Style, more 
flexible and configurable features.
9.5.10.14 
PRAYAS 
– 
Pursuing 
Excellence 
in 
Governance (https://prayas.nic.in)
PRAYAS – “Dashboard of Dashboards” pursuing 
excellence in governance has been developed under 
the direction of the PMO with collaborative efforts of 
Data Analytics Informatics Division, NIC and Centre of 
Excellence for Data Analytics (CEDA), NICSI to present 
a comprehensive and consolidated view of schemes of 
various Ministries/Departments in one single platform for 
improved monitoring and decision-making. 
This platform offers interactive visualizations, robust 
analytics, and actionable insights to support data-driven 
governance, ensuring alignment between policy making 
and program implementation. Prayas integrates data 
electronically via APIs directly from the MIS/IT systems 
of the concerned Ministries and Departments. 
9.5.10.15 Rashtriya Puraskar Portal
Rashtriya Puraskar Portal is an Award Ecosystem 
of Government of India. It is a configurable platform, 
designed and developed by MHA Informatics Division 
II, National Informatics Centre. This platform has been 
developed in an endeavor to achieve the vision of Hon’ble 
Prime Minister of India to transform the entire ecosystem 
of the National Awards instituted by various Ministries/
Department/Organization of Government of India. It has 
the capability of accepting nominations for each award 
as per the defined format, digitized diversified selection 
process, developed awardees dashboard, scientific 
analysis for supporting of various decisions, monitoring 
dashboard for monitoring ongoing nominations etc. 
9.5.10.16 Government eProcurement system of NIC 
(GePNIC©)
GePNIC provides a platform to conduct online tendering 
for Goods/ Works/ Services including Global Tenders, 
Turnkey projects, Rate Contracts. Widely used in 31 
States /UTs and over 800 Central Govt entities. User 
entity specific rule configuration, regular capacity building 
and handholding support as part of the implementation. 
Central Public Procurement Portal (eprocure.gov.in) has 
been integrated with Government eMarketplace [GeM-
CPPP] as per directions of Procurement Policy Division, 
Min of Finance. On an average, around 6,000 tenders 
are processed every day. 
On similar lines the State Public Procurement portal 
has been developed and at present is used by Govt of 
Assam. It also bagged the Gems of India award in 
July 2024.
9.5.10.17 e-Granthalaya (https://egranthalaya.nic.in)
e-Granthalaya is an Integrated Library Management 
Software developed by NIC for the Automation & 
Networking of Government Libraries, which facilitates 
web-based data entry with a centralized Database. This 
digital platform provides a complete cloud ready solution 
to convert traditional libraries into Digital Library.
Latest version of e-Granthalaya 4.0 is a Web-based and 
Mobile based access solution with a centralized database 
for clusters of libraries. The ICT solution is compliant with 
international standards prevalent in libraries with the use 
of the latest ICT technology.
9.5.10.18 Digital Archiving and Management 
The National Informatics Centre (NIC) is leading the 
charge in promoting the need for digitizing and archiving 
government documents. Using DSpace, an open-source 
software tool for managing digital assets, NIC is helping 
government departments build robust digital repositories. 
DSpace enables the seamless creation of digital archives 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
233
where all types of content such as text, images, etc. can 
be securely stored and easily accessed.
Projects Undertaken are:
1.	
The Official Debates of Rajya Sabha Digital 
Repository (https://rsdebate.nic.in).
2.	
India 
Code 
Information 
System 
Digital 
repository of Central and State laws and their 
subordinate legislations (https://indiacode.nic.in)
3.	
Parliament Digital Library (https://eparlib.nic.in/)
4.	
MetaOnline (https://metaonline.nic.in):.
5.	
Tribal Digital Document Repository (https://
repository.tribal.gov.in/)
6.	
eRecords (NIC Records Preservation System) 
https://erecords.nic.in
7.	
Digital Files of Rajya Sabha Secretariat (https://
rsrecords.nic.in/)
9.5.10.19 Swagatam
Swagatam is an initiative by the Government of India to 
facilitate the common man. Swagatam facility enables 
the citizens to have a smooth and simple process of 
making an appointment. It has advanced features of 
eliminating all the cumbersome and tedious procedures 
of making a request for an appointment and then visiting 
the premises.
9.5.11 Mobile Apps Store
Mobile Application Division has Nodal center in NIC-HQ 
Delhi and four competency centers at Chennai, Shimla, 
Patna, and Kannur. All the centers are collectively 
working for development and hosting of mobile apps 
in android and iOS. To bring all these apps under one 
umbrella for better visibility and global reach from a single 
point of contact NIC has subscribed to user accounts in 
Google play store and iOS/ iTunes. Total mobile app 
count reached 257 published mobile apps on Android 
App store. The Total count on iOS Account reached 91. 
9.5.12 
Centre 
of 
Excellence 
and 
Software 
Development Unit 
1.	
Centre of Excellence for Data Analytics (CEDA), 
a joint initiative of NIC & NICSI, was established 
in February 2018 and formally inaugurated by 
Hon’ble MeitY in September 2018. CEDA has 
undertaken several Projects for various Ministries/
Departments; notable among them are:

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
234
2.	
Centre of Excellence in Artificial Intelligence 
(COE-AI) was set up in January 2019 with a vi-
sion to improve transparency and efficiency in e-
governance projects through AI implementation in 
work automation and to improve Citizen Govern-
ment Communications. NIC has set up two state-
of-the-art AI labs with supercomputing facilities at 
Delhi & Kolkata and is poised to further increase its 
AI compute capabilities to train large AI models
3.	
The Centre of Excellence in Blockchain 
Technology (CoE-BCT) has been established 
at NIC, Karnataka with a vision to build niche 
applications using Blockchain technologies in close 
coordination with the Government, which can be 
rolled out across the country. Blockchain networks 
have been established with Blockchain nodes 
distributed across NIC data centers. The CoE 
is instrumental in deploying various Blockchain 
platforms, such as Certificate Chain, Drug Logistic 
Chain, Property chain, Document chain and 
Judicial chain
	
These generic platforms can facilitate easy roll-out 
for any State or Ministry.
	
National Blockchain Framework (NBF) is an 
initiative of MeitY to facilitate for large scale 
adoption of Blockchain technology in the domain of 
e-Governance As a part of this initiative, NIC has 
deployed State-of-the-art distributed infrastructure 
at Data Centres located at Pune, Bhubaneswar, 
and Hyderabad. NIC has designed, developed and 
deployed blockchain platforms such as Certificate 
chain, Document chain, Property chain, Supply 
chain, and Judicial chain on NBF infrastructure. 
NBF was launched by the Hon’ble Secretary, 
MeitY, Shri. S Krishnan on 4th Sep 2024.
4.	
Centre of Excellence (CoE) in Application 
Security is established to provide state-of-the-art 
Security solutions & services for the Information 
Technology needs of the Government of India, 
and establishing best practices, standards, and 
initiatives in Application security. The centers 
are 
located 
at 
Bhubaneshwar, 
Guwahati, 
Jaipur, Lucknow, and Thiruvananthapuram. The 
centers are involved in Application Security Audit 
Compliance and Testing related activities.
5.	
NIC Software Development Units (SDU) provide 
state of art services using latest tools and technology. 
NIC Software Development and Training Centers 
are engaged in important e-Governance projects 
in respect of development of software on turnkey 
basis, implementation, project level training and 
subsequent support	
6.	
Open Technology Group (OTG) focus areas are 
to evaluate and recommend Open-Source Software 
(OSS) for    e-Governance Solutions, maintain 
distribution repository of recommended OSS for 
usage across NIC, guide and handhold NIC teams 
in keeping their OSS driven system Secure and 
provide training on OSS. The OSS Stack 2024-25 
initiative is underway, with an updated document 
currently under review
7.	
NIC Centre of Excellence on Microservices 
acts as the resource center of consultancy, 
development of microservices based projects 
and support for identifying and moving feasible 
monolithic applications to microservices based 
applications. The Centre has been instrumental 
in educating the NIC Units across the country 
about the benefits of using microservices based 
architecture in designing new software projects as 
well as migrating existing monolithic applications to 
microservices based architecture.
9.5.13 NICSI
National Informatics Centre Services Incorporated 
(NICSI) is a Company registered under section 25 of the 
Companies Act, 1956, a Government of India Enterprise 
under National Informatics Centre (NIC), Ministry of 
Electronics & Information Technology (MeitY). NICSI 
provides procurement and supply of total information and 
communications technology (ICT) solutions and services 
in the entire Government Sector including departments 
and organizations of the Central Government and State 
Governments.
NICSI services include state-of-the-art hardware, soft-
ware, consulting, technical support, design and develop-

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
235
ment, operations and management, quality check as well 
as end-to-end ICT solutions and services. It has under-
taken various ICT projects of government departments 
and organizations providing state-of-the-art technology 
and cost-effective solutions to ensure efficiency, trans-
parency and reliability in their implementation, and has 
been providing such services since last more than 29 
years to most of the departments/organizations both in 
the Central and State Governments. Some of the presti-
gious projects include National Data Centre at Lakshmi 
Nagar, New Delhi, enhancement of NIC Cloud Services, 
National Data Centre at Shastri Park, New Delhi, Na-
tional Knowledge Network (NKN), facilitating various 
projects like e-Procurement, e-Office, e-Hospital, iRAD, 
Diksha, Contactless Biometric Attendance System etc.
With a turnover of more than Rs.2350 Crores (FY 2023-
24), and Rs 1889 crores (till 31.12.2024) (unaudited) 
NICSI has successfully executed more than 29,000 proj-
ects in India and other developing nations by providing 
state of art and cost-effective solutions for all their grow-
ing ICT needs.
NICSI has set-up a Product Business Division (PBD) with 
an aim to productize, standardize and promote Software 
Products developed by NIC/NICSI at International Level. 
NICSI has also set-up the Centre of Excellence of Data 
Analytics (CEDA).
9.6	
National e-Governance Division (NeGD)
NeGD is an Independent Business Division (IBD) 
within Digital India Corporation (erstwhile Media Lab 
Asia), under MeitY. NeGD’s major operational areas 
include program management, project development, 
technology management, capacity building, awareness 
and communications related activities under Digital India 
program. NeGD provides technical and advisory support 
to Central Ministries / Departments, State Government 
Departments and other Government organizations in 
their Digital India initiatives. NeGD has developed and is 
managing several national public digital platforms such 
as DigiLocker, UMANG, Rapid Assessment System, 
OpenForge, API Setu, Poshan Tracker, Academic Bank 
of Credits, National Academic Depositories, National AI 
Portal, MyScheme, India Stack Global, Meri Pehchaan, 
etc. The details may be seen at Chapter 2.
9.7	
Standardization 
Testing 
and 
Quality 
Certification Directorate
9.7.1	 Introduction
Standardisation 
Testing 
and 
Quality 
Certification 
(STQC) Directorate, an attached office of the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology, Government of 
India, provides Quality Assurance services in the area 
of Electronics and IT through countrywide network of 
laboratories and centres. 
Over the last four and half Decades, STQC has established 
itself as a pioneer in the field of Testing, Calibration, IT 
& e-Governance, Training, Certification and providing 
nationwide support to various government, Public and 
Private organizations including Startups, MSME etc. 
Major clientele STQC served are: Central Government 
Ministries / Departments /State Governments ,R 
& D organizations (DRDO, ISRO) Défense (Indian 
Army, Navy, Airforce) Telecom (DoT, TRAI) Power 
(Power Grid, CPRI) Railway (Indian Railways & Metro 
Rail) PSUs (IOC, NTPC, Coal India, BHEL, SAIL etc) 
Recruitment agencies (SSC, State Bodies) Statutory 
Bodies (e.g., BIS, UIDAI, Cert-In etc.) and many more.
9.7.2	 STQC Labs/ Centre

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
236
9.7.3 Activities /Services of STQC
IT & e- Governance
e-Governance Conformity Assessment 
 
Quality Assurance Framework
 
Scheme for Empanelment of Cloud Service 
Provider 
 
Scheme for Empanelment of e-Gov. Software Test 
Labs
IT System & Product Certification
 
IoT System Certification 
 
Common Criteria Certification
 
Website Quality Certification
 
Trusted Electronics Value Chain Certification 
 
E-Procurement System Certification (EPS) 
 
Bio-metric Devices Testing and Certification
 
Smart Card Testing and Certification
 
QR Code Scanner Testing & Certification
 
NCMC certification
Software & System Testing
 
Software Testing and Assessment
 
Software Process Assessment
 
Information Security Testing and Assessment
 
Software Functional Testing
 
Application Performance Testing
 
Application Security Testing
 
Mobile app Security testing 
 
API Security Testing
 
Vulnerability Assessment & Penetration Testing
 
Acceptance Testing of e-Governance Projects
 
Independent Verification and Validation 
 
Usability Testing
 
Accessibility Testing
 
Embedded Device/Software Security Testing
 
Secure Code review
Electrotechnical Testing
 
Component Testing of SMDs (passive and active, 
VLSI devices)
 
Equipment/Subsystem 
and 
Module 
Software 
Functional Testing
 
Environmental Testing
 
Testing for Safety of Electronics/Electrical products
 
EMI/EMC Testing
 
Opto Electronics Testing
 
Reliability Testing and Analysis
 
EVM /VVPAT Testing
 
Medical Electronics equipment testing
 
Power / Energy meter Testing
Calibration
 
Electro Technical Calibration
 
Non-Electrical Calibration
 
High Precision Calibration
 
RF Calibration
 
Optical Calibration,
 
EMI/EMC Calibration
 
Bio-Medical Equipment Calibration 
 
On Site Calibration
Certification
Management System Certification
 
ISO 27001 Information Security Management 
System (ISMS) Certification
 
ISO 9001 Quality Management System (QMS) 
Certification 
Product Certification
 
Product Safety Certification based on IEC 
Standards (S mark)
Capacity Building
 
Quality Management Programs as per ISO: 
9001:2015
 
ISMS LA program as per ISO: 27001:2022

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
237
 
Laboratory Management Programs as per ISO: 
17025:2017
 
Reliability Engineering Programs
 
Environmental Management Programs
 
Common Criteria
 
Information Security
 
E-Governance Quality Assurance
 
Software Quality Engineering 
 
Measurement Uncertainty
9.7.4 Major Activities / Achievements
9.7.4.1 STQC Hq, New Delhi
a)	
IT & e-Gov Division
1.	
STQC has been entrusted by MoHUA for third 
party cyber security audit of all 100 smart cities 
under Smart City Mission
 
 ETDC Ajmer is assigned as a nodal office for the 
cyber security audit of Smart Cities
	
	The following Activities are to be considered in the 
Smart City Audit:
	
	End Point Devices Security Audit
	
	Vulnerability Assessment of Network Infrastructure
	
	Process Audit
	
	Trusted Electronics Value chain audit
•	 Total SRF sent to City: 100 out of 100
•	 1st cycle audit report received from Lab: 49 
out of 100
•	 1st cycle audit report issue to City: 42 out of 49
2. 
Indian Common Criteria Certification Scheme 
(IC3S) is operated by STQC Directorate, (MeitY), 
Govt. of India. Under IC3S scheme, the Evaluation 
Laboratories or Common Criteria Test laboratories 
(henceforth will be referred as CCTLs) perform 
evaluations of Information Technology (henceforth 
will be referred as IT) products against the Common 
Criteria Standards.
	
Common Criteria Test Laboratories (CCTL) are 
established to support IC3S. CCTLs at Delhi, 
Kolkata Bangalore, and Mumbai maintain adequate 
systems to support IT security evaluations
	
STQC has participated as an observer in VPA of 
JISEC (Common criteria) at Tokyo Japan.
	
STQC ( representing India) participated in CCRA 
meeting held at Qatar, Doha.
 
STQC, certification body of Common Criteria 
representing India in CCRA (Common Criteria 
Recognition Arrangement) from April 2023 to 
April 2025. India has been nominated as chair of 
CCS Committee (One of the committees of CCRA 
responsible for audit of certification Bodies of 18 
Certificate Producing country). 
3.	
STQC Directorate has been entrusted by Unique 
Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) as a quality 
assurance partner. The objective of Biometric 
Device Certification Scheme (BDCS) is to 
perform assessment/evaluation and subsequent 
certification of Biometric Devices and to facilitate 
availability 
of 
quality 
assessed 
Pre-certified 
Hardware, authentication/ enrolment Biometric 
Devices along with QR Code scanner device for 
offline authentication to user agencies like AUAs/
KUAs as per Aadhaar Act.
4. 
STQC has developed a Website Quality Certification 
Scheme based upon National and International 
Standards/Best practices. The certification scheme 
aims to help in hardening of websites from wide 
range of Security threats, increasing accessibility, 
assuring commitment to services and ensuring 
compliance to the requirements of Guidelines for 
Indian Government Websites (GIGW) developed 
by National Informatics Centre (NIC) and adopted 
by Department of Administrative Reforms and 
Public Grievances (DARPG), Government of India. 
STQC has issued approx. 15 Certificates under 
this scheme in this year and total 128 websites has 
valid certificate.
5. 
IoT System Certification Scheme (IoT SCS): The 
objective of this scheme is to promote security 
of IoT ecosystem. This scheme will facilitate 
improvement of National Cyber Security profile.
 
The implementation of this Certification Program 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
238
will provide confidence to users that the risks 
associated with the threats currently set forth in 
the IoT-SCS are addressed by a device/system 
provider through conformance to this scheme. 
Demonstration of conformance through this 
certification program provides formal recognition 
of a conformance to the industry standards. STQC 
has certified 07 products under this scheme from 
January, 2024.
	
MeitY has entrusted STQC to conduct Testing, 
Audit & Certification of CCTV Camera Under PPO 
and BIS has empanelled STQC labs for Testing/ 
Evaluation of CCTV Camera Under CRO Scheme.
6.	
National 
Common 
Mobility 
Card 
(NCMC) 
Certification Scheme: NCMC Ecosystem Testing 
and Certification is an impartial assessment of a 
product by an independent body. 
	
STQC labs at Delhi and Bangalore, maintain 
adequate 
systems 
to 
support 
IT 
security 
evaluations in keeping with the tests for which it 
is seeking accreditation and maintain records on 
all test equipment or test suites used during the 
testing ion of NCMC Ecosystem.
	
STQC developed a testing facility at Delhi 
and Bangalore to test four products of NCMC 
Ecosystem namely Validation Terminal, Gate 
Control Unit, AFC System and Acquirer System.
	
STQC is working out on the modalities for NCMC 
testing with MoHUA.
7. 
E Procurement System Certification Scheme: 
E-Procurement is identified as a mission mode 
project under national E-Governance plan. E 
Procurement System Certification is an integral 
requirement 
by 
Government 
envisaged 
by 
MeitY, CVC and other Govt Ministries. STQC 
has been entrusted for evaluation, assessment 
and Certification of EPS. 08 EPS are certified by 
STQC from January,2024 and 22 EPS has valid 
certificate.
8.	
SAB- STQC Empanelled Test Laboratory (SETL): 
STQC Directorate is the designated approving 
body for the operation of the scheme. STQC 
maintains a management system in accordance 
with international practices (ISO/IEC 17011) and 
that its approved conformity assessment bodies 
are competent in their operations of testing and 
assessments.
	
The scheme is intended to recognize the 
competence of IT test laboratories and to provide 
confidence to the stakeholders that Test results of 
Solutions tested in these laboratories are reliable, 
reproducible and repeatable. Under the scheme, 
after satisfactory completion of the assessment, 
the laboratory is issued a `Certificate of Approval’ 
indicating conformance to specified requirements 
of applicable standards as specified in the scheme.
	
SETLs assessment are carried out by designated 
assessors of labs/centres empanelled by STQC 
Hq.
	
The scheme covers both private and public 
(Government) IT test laboratories involved in 
software and system testing with in-house and/or 
onsite capabilities. At present total 13 SETLs are 
empanelled by STQC.
b)	
Certification Division of STQC is implementing 
various certification schemes
1.	
Information Security Management System 
(ISMS) Certification Scheme:
 
Total 09 certificates are issued by STQC for ISMS 
from January 2024.
2.	
Quality Management System (QMS) Certification 
Scheme: 
3.	
Safety(S-Mark) Certification Scheme: 
 
Total 05 products are certified under S Mark 
scheme by STQC from January,2024.
4.	
Data Centre Certification Scheme
 
STQC has also successfully trained 12 Officers 
for EXIM EPI Certified Data Centre Professional 
(CDCP) Course organized by M/s EPI, India
5.	
Assessment of Cloud Service Providers
6.	
Assessment 
and 
notifications 
of 
Digital 
Forensics labs as Examiner of Electronics 
Evidence

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
239
	
MeitY has entrusted STQC Directorate for 
assessment and evaluation of Central Govt / State 
Govt bodies i.e Forensic science laboratories for 
notifying as “Examiner of Electronic Evidence” as 
per provision under Section 79A of Information 
Technology Act 2000. 
MeitY under a scheme for the above purpose has notified 
15 labs till date as Examiner of Electronic Evidence as 
provisioned Under Section 79A of IT Act 2000 upon 
assessment and evaluation of applicant laboratories by 
STQC auditors. 
STQC has also been entrusted to conduct annual 
surveillance assessment of notified laboratories and is 
carrying out surveillance assessments regularly.
9.7.5	 Capacity Building
STQC is conducting various Capacity building & skill 
development programs through regular/ short term 
training courses, workshops etc. ETDC Jaipur/IIQM, 
CFR Chennai, ETDC Goa & ETDC Solan are dedicated 
centres for training and have conducted many training 
courses on Quality Management Reliability, Lab 
Management, Information Security etc.
STQC has conducted following courses in 2024
Information Security Management System (ISMS)
IIQM Jaipur has conducted following courses on ISMS
 
Lead Auditor training course for ISMS (ISO 
27001:2022)- NBQP registered: 
 
STQC-CISP- 
Certified 
Information 
Security 
Professional Course (5 days)
 
STQC-CIISA- 
Certified 
Internal 
Information 
Security Auditor (3 days) 
 
ISMS Transition cum Awareness based on ISO 
27001:2022 (2 days)
Quality Management System (QMS)
IIQM Jaipur conducted courses on QMS such as 
 
Lead Auditor training course for QMS (ISO 
9001:2015)-NBQP registered: 
 
QMS Internal Auditor Course based on ISO/IS 
9001:2015 (3 Days): 
IIQM
Indian Institute of Quality Management (IIQM), a division 
of Electronics Test & Development Centre Jaipur 
operates under STQC Directorate, Ministry of Electronics 
& Information Technology, Government of India and 
provides training to industries and user departments 
in the area of QMS (ISO 9001), Laboratory Quality 
Management (ISO 17025) and Information Security 
Management Systems (ISO 27001).
Since 
inception, 
IIQM 
has 
trained 
over 
20000 
professionals, including those working overseas. The 
trainings imparted by IIQM have resulted in creating a 
Quality oriented infrastructure across the industries and 
institutions at National level. 
Recognitions/Accreditations:
IIQM functions as an approved Training Organization 
(TO) recognized by NBQP (QCI) for conducting approved 
courses in the area of Quality and Information Security 
Management Systems.
Trainings Provided by IIQM Jaipur:
IIQM has conducted following specialized training on 
regular basis:
• 
Lead Auditor training course for QMS (ISO 
9001:2015)- NBQP registered (26 candidates)
• 
Lead Auditor training course for ISMS (ISO 
27001:2022)- NBQP registered (119 candidates)
• 
Laboratory QMS and Internal Audit as per ISO 
17025:2017 (approx. 140 candidates)
• 
STQC-CISP - Certified Information Security 
Professional Course (5 days) (28 candidates)
• 
STQC-CIISA - Certified Internal Information 
Security Auditor (3 days) (97 candidates)
• 
QMS Internal Auditor Course based on ISO/IS 
9001:2015 (3 Days) (10 candidates)
• 
ISMS Transition cum Awareness based on ISO 
27001:2022 (2 days) (17 candidates)
Other than above courses various courses as per the 
specific need of client organization have also been 
conducted by IIQM

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
240
ETDC Solan conducted following training courses:
Training on ISMS LA Course as per ISO/IEC 27001:2022 
Officers of THDC (Tehri Hydro Development Corporation) 
and internal candidates from STQC HQ and other STQC 
Labs during 28 May to 01 June 2024 at ETDC Solan.
On-site QMS Internal Auditor Training Course as per 
ISO 9001:2015 is successfully designed and organized 
for Officers DGRE (Defence Geoinformatics Research 
Establishment) in August 2024 
ERTL (E) conducted various knowledge-based and skill 
oriented training programmes for industries, laboratories, 
Students & individuals in different Areas of Technology, 
such as, Measurement Uncertainties, Quality Assurance 
& Management Standards (ISO 9001: 2015), Information 
Security 
Management 
system 
ISO 
27001:2013), 
Laboratory Quality Management Standards ISO/IEC 
17025:2017
ETDC Goa Conducted following training programs for 
capacity enhancement through design, development 
and conduct of training for the working professionals to 
develop their skills in different areas-
 
Lead Auditor training course for ISMS (ISO 27001: 
2022) (5 days)
 
STQC-CISP - Information Certified Security 
Professional Course (5 days)
 
STQC-CIISA - Certified Internal Information 
Security Auditor (3 days)
 
ISMS Transition cum Awareness based on ISO 
27001:2022 (2 days)
 
Laboratory Management System & Internal Audit 
as per ISO/IEC 17025:2017 (4 days)
 
Calibration System and measurement Uncertainty 
(3 days)
Training programs are attended by 76 participants from 
25 organizations.
ERTL(N) conducted various knowledge-based and 
skill oriented training programmes such as:
• 
Design and Development of Certified Accessibility 
Auditor course
• 
Lectures 
on 
Mobile 
Device 
Security 
and 
Cyber Security Testing and Audit [Compliance 
Assessment and Evaluation Techniques] in CISO 
deep dive training under Cyber Surakshit Bharat 
Project of MeitY for CISO’s at GNLU, HIPA& IIPA.
• 
Awareness Workshop for Smart Cities regarding 
Cyber Security Assessment Requirements
• 
Training to STQC Officials on Cyber Security & 
Cyber Crimes
• 
Online training for the Government & Private 
Establishments on the Accessibility of digital 
platforms (Websites/Apps/Portal, etc.) conducted 
by CCPD
• 
Conducted training to STQC Officials from 
different IT centres on End Point Devices (CCTV), 
e-Procurement System, Mobile & Web Application 
Security and Code Review.
National Webinar on Data Centre-related standards for 
Dept. of Telecom.
Participation in WBL scheme 
The Work-Based Learning (WBL) program (Ministry 
of Electronics and IT, Govt. of India) is designed for 
fresh Graduate Engineers of Scheduled Caste (SC), 
Scheduled Tribe (ST), Women and Economically 
Weaker Section (EWS), to gain practical experience 
and exposure in Information Technology, Electronics 
and related areas. STQC labs are involved in providing 
training to candidates under this scheme in the field of 
electronics & IT.
Digital India Internship Program
The Digital India Internship Scheme 2023 was launched 
by MeitY and STQC has trained various candidate for 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
241
Safety testing at ERTL(N) for this scheme.
Various courses, as per the specific need of client 
organization and Industries have also been conducted 
by Lab/Centres of STQC.
9.7.6 Activity in North East Region
ETDC Guwahati & Agartala are two laboratories under 
the STQC Directorate, MeitY, Govt. of India operating 
in the NE Region. and extending services to 08(eight) 
states of the region
ETDC, Guwahati
The services provided by ETDC Guwahati are as follows:
 
Test & Calibration services to the Industries, 
Technology users & Service providers.   
 
Website Quality certification for different websites 
of Govt. Ministries, Department and PSUs etc.
 
Smart City Audit 
Initiatives in Test & Calibration services: 
Test & Calibration services of ETDC Guwahati is extended 
to the organizations located throughout the NE Region 
covering all the 8(eight)-States towards improvement of 
Quality of their products and services. The services are 
received by most of the Small, Medium and Large Scale 
Industries covering the Industrial sectors like – Oil & 
Natural Gas, Oil Refineries, Exploration units, Railways, 
Indian Air Force(IAF), Power - Generation, Transmission 
& Distribution, Paper, Cement & Building material, 
Food & Beverages, Cosmetics, Cable & Conductors, 
Fertilizer, Plywood, Carbon Products, Steel, and Service 
sectors like – Aviation, Engineering & Construction, 
Telecommunication, Automobile, Service & Maintenance 
units, R&D and Test Labs, Hospitals, Pharmaceutical & 
Pathological Laboratories etc. About 2246 calibration 
jobs being executed by ETDC Guwahati – covering more 
than 64 Nos. of LSI, MSI, SSI Industrial units, Govt. 
PSUs, Private and other technology user organizations 
of NE-Region. 
On-Site Calibration Camps:
To make the STQC services available at the door steps 
of the client’s’ site located at various remote places in 
the NE Region, on-site calibration camp being organized 
by ETDC Guwahati at Oil India Ltd., NEEPCO, BCPL, 
GAIL, AGCL, BVFCL, AAI to facilitate the qualitative 
requirements of the industries and technology users.
NABL Accreditation & Inter Laboratory Comparison 
(ILC): 
Calibration services of ETDC, Guwahati are accredited 
(No. CC-3797) by the National Accreditation Board 
for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) in 
conformance to ISO/IEC 17025, 2017 international 
standard for accreditation in the fields of Electro-Technical 
(AC/DC Current, Voltage, Power, Energy, Frequency, 
Resistance, Inductance & Capacitance), Thermal 
(Temperature), Mechanical (Acoustics, Pressure, Mass, 
Balance, Dimension & Volume) & Optical (Optical 
-Power, Wavelength & Stability) calibration services. 
Inter Laboratory Comparisons (ILC) programme is also 
being participated for parameters like Power, Frequency, 
Temperature, Pressure, Dimension & Acoustics at 
various reference labs towards achieving satisfactory 
qualitative performance level.
Initiatives in IT Test & Assessment Services:
Initiatives have been taken by ETDC Guwahati 
towards facilitating services in the field of Website 
Quality Certification as per GIGW 2018 and GIGW 
3.0 requirements under the STQC Website Quality 
Certification (CQW) scheme. ETDC, Guwahati also 
actively participated in the Smart City Audit project as 
per ISMS guideline. This center audited 07 of numbers of 
smart cities located throughout the country. More than 15 
Nos. of Websites corresponding to different Directorate/
Ministries of the country are being Tested/ Evaluated/ 
Assessed by ETDC, Guwahati for their certification.
ETDC, Agartala
• 
Website evaluation /certification job as per GIGW 
3.0 with W3C recommended open source tools.
• 
Physical and Configuration verification of several 
PC, peripheral and UPS for different Govt. 
organization.
• 
Job executing with collaboration of ERTL (East).
• 
The smart city audits for a total of seven cities have 
been conducted by ETDC Agartala.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
242
9.8	
National Institute of Electronics and Information 
Technology (NIELIT)
9.8.1	 Introduction 
NIELIT is an autonomous scientific society under the 
administrative control of Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY), Government of India. 
NIELIT is actively engaged in Capacity Building and 
Skill Development in the areas of IECT, such as Future 
Skills, Cyber Law, Cyber Security, Cloud Computing, 
ESDM, and related verticals. It offers courses in Degree/ 
Diploma Levels as well as Skilling Courses. It is also 
one of the National Examination & Accreditation Bodies, 
which accredits institutes/ organizations for the conduct 
of courses in the Non-Formal Sector. NIELIT is also 
rolling out Digital Competency Programmes for many 
State Governments for its employees and the masses. 
NCVET recognizes NIELIT as an Awarding Body and 
Assessment Agency for NSQF-aligned courses.
NIELIT has its presence over 50+ locations across the 
country. Besides its own Centres, NIELIT is also well 
networked through 700+ Accredited Training Institutions 
for the training of O/A/B/C level courses and through a 
network of about 9000+ Facilitation Centres engaged in 
training of Digital Competency Courses, making NIELIT 
distinctly positioned in terms of its outreach to all corners 
of the country and all segments of the society. 
Spectrum of NIELIT Courses
NIELIT plays an important role in skilling youth in the 
IECT area. The wide repertoire of NIELIT Courses 
includes: (i) Degree/Diploma Level Courses such as 
M.Tech, B.Tech, MCA, BCA programs offered by the 
NIELIT Centres in association with State Universities/
Technical Board; Aurangabad Centre is also facilitating 
PhD Program in the area of Electronics (ii) Skilling 
Courses (Long Term) such as O Level(IT), A Level 
(IT), CHMT-O Level, etc. ; (iii) Skilling Courses (Short 
Term) in niche areas such as IoT, Cloud Computing, 
Machine Learning, Cyber Security, AI, etc. and (iv) 
Digital Competency Programmes for the proliferation 
of Digital Proficiency in the country; besides specialized 
programs in emerging technologies targeted towards 
empowering the employees of the State Governments 
and Departments of Central Line Ministries. In addition, 
NIELIT has also created expertise for the rollout of 
customized skilling, upskilling, and reskilling programs 
as per the specific needs of youths and industries.
NIELIT qualifications are widely accepted across the 
country. Owing to the quality, some of the NIELIT digital 
competency courses are linked with both promotion & 
recruitment by the number of state governments viz; 
Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chandigarh, Daman & Diu, 
Gujarat, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh. Also, NIELIT 
offers its CCC course free of cost in online mode as a 
knowledge product through its virtual academy. The 
course is also available at 15+ Indian and International 
Language, accessible at https://nva.nielit.gov.in/ccc 
Since 2014, NIELIT has trained more than 80 lakh 
candidates. The following data summarizes the number 
of candidates trained in various courses under NIELIT up 
to the 3rd quarter of the fiscal year 2024-25. 
S. 
N.
Course Category
Number of Skilled
1
Degree/Diploma Level Courses
3,226 
2
Skill Based Long Term 
Courses
92,807 
3
Skill Based Short Term Courses
2,63,251 
4
Digital Competancy Courses 
2,45,315
Total
6,04,599
Taking into the account advancement in IT and Electronics 
and emergence of disruptive technologies, NIELIT has 
been making efforts to update its repertoire of courses in 
upcoming technologies such as Artificial Intelligence, IoT, 
Big Data, Cloud Computing, Robotics and 3D Printing. 
In this regard, NIELIT Centres at Aurangabad, Calicut, 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
243
Kolkata have been identified as Technology Resource 
Centres to offer blended learning programmes under 
the Future Skills prime initiative which is being jointly 
conceived by MeitY and NASSCOM. NIELIT is amongst 
the front-runners that have aligned 124 Skill Oriented 
courses with National Skills Qualifications Framework 
(NSQF) at different levels ranging from Level 2 to 6.
Further, in the recent past, NIELIT has successfully 
organized two international conferences titled NIELIT’s 
International Conference on Communications, Electronics 
and Digital Technologies (NICE-DT 2023 and NICE-
DT 2024). To honour and recognize the contribution of 
the women workforce in the Electronics Manufacturing 
Industry in India, an event was organised by NIELIT on 
27th January, 2024 wherein over 250 women workers 
from 5 prominent manufacturing companies participated. 
NIELIT also organised the first Future Skills Summit in 
Guwahati on 15th February, 2024
NIELIT Deemed to be University
Ministry of Education on the advice of UGC has issued 
Notification dated 15th July, 2024 declaring NIELIT Ropar 
(Punjab) with its 11 constituent units as an Institution 
deemed to be University under distinct category. 
Consequently, NIELIT has obtained the status of Deemed 
University vide Gazette Notification No. 9-3/2023-U.3(A) 
dated 15 July 2024, published in Part -I, Section-1 of 
the Gazette of India. NIELIT Deemed to be University 
launched 
Diploma, 
Undergraduate 
(Engineering), 
Postgraduate (Engineering), Undergraduate (Computer 
Applications), 
Postgraduate 
(Computer 
Science), 
Postgraduate (Computer Applications) and Ph.D. (in 
CSE/CSA/Electronics) Level programmes.
9.8.2	 NIELIT Centres/Labs/Infrastructures Launched/
inaugurated 
I.	
On 6th October 2024, Hon’ble Union Minister of 
State for Electronics & Information Technology 
and Commerce & Industry, Shri Jitin Prasada, laid 
the foundation stone of a New NIELIT Centre at 
Pilibhit, Uttar Pradesh. On this occasion, he also 
inaugurated the “Yuva Rojgar Mela” for the youth 
of Pilibhit. Further, the MIELIT Centre Pilibhit has 
been made operational and was inaugurated by the 
Hon’ble Union Minister of State for Electronics & 
Information Technology and Commerce & Industry, 
Shri Jitin Prasada, on 23rd December 2024.
II.	
NIELIT Alumni cum Placement Portal was 
launched on 20th August, 2024 by Hon’ble Union 
Minister of State for Ministry of Electronics & 
Information Technology & Commerce & Industry, 
Shri Jitin Prasada.. The portal provides for one-to-
one alumni connection with global map feature and 
multiple job opportunities for NIELIT alumni and 
students, connecting them with leading recruiters.
III.	
A newly constructed Girls Hostel was inaugurated 
by Shri. S. Krishnan, Secretary, Ministry of 
Electronics & Information Technology (MeitY) at 
NIELIT Srinagar on August 3, 2024.
IV.	
The NIELIT Bishramganj Study Centre, was 
inaugurated on 13th Sept 2024, marking a 
significant milestone in Tripura region’s educational 
landscape. NIELIT Bishramganj centre, besides 
introducing Computer/IT courses initially, will 
expand in Hardware/Electronics courses with 
various Lab setup soon. 
 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
244
9.8.3 Capacity Building Projects
9.8.3.1 Initiative for Cyber Security Aware Society in 
NE States
Project is sponsored by MeitY vide Administrative 
Approval 
No. 
AAA.22/2/2022-CSRD-MeitY 
dated 
22/02/2022 with financial support of Rs. 725.19 Lakh 
over a period of three (03) Years. Project is being 
implemented by NIELIT Kohima in the state of Nagaland 
with the objective to raise comprehensive complete 
awareness about risk in cyber space targeting different 
sections of society. Achievement as on 31.10.2024: - 
• 
Procurement of equipment-Completed
• 
Review and Upgradation of existing Awareness 
Material to be used in the project-On-going
• 
22 plus awareness Audio and videos are developed
• 
Creation and hosting of Resource Portal along with 
MIS and helpline-Underdevelopment
• 
246 Awareness Workshop has been conducted
• 
State Level Cyber Security expo cum Conferences-
Schedule to conduct in the coming months
• 
Cyber Security awareness week in selected 
schools/colleges-On-going
• 
Updating and maintenance of resource portal and 
MIS – On-going process
9.8.3.2 Design and Development of EEG Based Real-
Time Depth of Anaesthesia (DoA) Monitoring System
Project is sponsored by MeitY vide Administrative 
Approval No. 1(1)/2022-ME&HI MeitY dated 28/03/2022 
with financial support of Rs. 455.23 Lakh over a period 
of three (03) Years. Project is being implemented by 
NIELIT Imphal in the state of Manipur. The objective of 
the project is to pre-process publicly available EEG data. 
Achievement as on 31.10.2024: -
 
Development of Methods for Pre-processing and 
Feature Extraction of EEG data-Completed
 
Development of preliminary machine learning 
model for DoA Estimation-Completed
 
Compilation of clinical EEG database with expert 
annotations-Completed
 
Finalization of the machine learning model using 
clinical EEG data-In Progress
 
Development and Validation of the hardware 
architecture of the model-In Progress
 
Prototyping of the proposed hardware architecture 
on FPGA-In Progress
 
Finalization of test setup along with the test plan - 
In Progress
9.8.3.3 Skill Development of Youths in Aspirational 
Districts in area of IECT leading to enhancement in 
Employability
Project is sponsored by MeitY vide Administrative 
Approval 1411/10/2019-HRD dated 28/02/2020 with 
Financial Support of Rs. 29.81 Crore over a period of 
three (03) Years. Project is being at 21 States in 81 
Aspirational Districts. Under the project, a total of 18,474 
candidates are registered and 17,298 candidates have 
been trained so far against the target of 18,209.
9.8.3.4 Capacity Building and Training in Emerging 
Technologies 
for 
Enhancing 
Employment 
Opportunities and Skilling
Project is sponsored by MeitY, vide Administrative 
Approval No. L-14011/11/2021-HRD dated 26/03/2021 
with Financial Support of Rs. 248.05 Lakh over a period 
of three (03) Years. The project is implemented by NIELIT 
Agartala to enable entrepreneurship & sustainable 
development among Youths of Tripura by providing 
Skill Development Training. Under the project, 1,856 
candidates have been trained so far against the training 
target of 1,400.

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
245
9.8.3.5 
Digital 
Intervention 
of 
Handloom 
and 
Handicraft Sector for Livelihood enhancement of 
artisans of NE States
Project is sponsored by MeitY, vide Administrative 
Approval No. L-14011/12/2021-HRD dated 30/03/2021 
with financial support of Rs. 619.12 Lakh, over a period 
of three (03) Years with the objective to setup Digital 
Enabled Common Facility Centre. Under the project, a 
total of 6,605 candidates have been trained so far against 
the total training target of 6,920.
9.8.3.6 Capacity Building in IECT including training 
in Digital Skill sets and Current Industry Demanding 
Technologies for various sections of society in the 
NE States [NECB 2.0]
Project is sponsored by MeitY vide Administrative 
Approval No. L-14011/33/2021-HRD, dated 02/02/2022 
with financial support of Rs. 9232.76 Lakh over a period 
of two (02) Years. The project is jointly being implemented 
by NIELIT Guwahati, Kohima, Itanagar, Imphal, Shillong, 
Aizawl, Gangtok and Agartala with the aim of overall up-
liftment of the socio-economic status of NE Citizens by 
creating a smart ecosystem with necessary IT education 
and skills. Under the project, 1,70,402 candidates have 
been trained so far against the total training target of 
1,71,710.
9.8.3.7 ICT intervention in Travel & Tourism (T&T) 
Industry through Capacity Building in New Age 
Digital Technologies
Project is sponsored by MeitY, vide Administrative 
Approval No. L-14011/23/2021-HRD dated 18/02/2022 
with financial support of Rs. 144.25 Lakh over a period 
of three (03) Years with the objective  of  empowering 
the youth with Digital skill including understanding 
of e-commerce digital transactions and associated 
concepts. Achievement as on 31.10.2024: -
 
Infrastructure Creation - 100% 
 
Creation of VR Content for Tourists & it’s hosting/
Digital Dash Board and Portal- 100% 
 
Mobile Application Containing multilingual e-audio 
contents for e- Tourist Guides/ Tourists - 100%
 
Development of e-content-100%,
 
LMS-100% 
 
234 stakeholders/youths have been trained.
9.8.3.8 
Self-employment 
Capacity 
building 
of 
the Engineering pass-out students belonging to 
Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe community
Project is sponsored by MeitY vide Administrative 
Approval No. L-14016/2/2021-HRD dated 30/03/2021 
with financial support of Rs. 443.73 Lakh over a period 
of three (03) Years. Project is being implemented jointly 
by NIELTI Patna, Haridwar, Chennai and Delhi (PMU). 
The objective of the project is to build the capacity of the 
Engineering pass-out students belonging to Scheduled 
Caste/Scheduled Tribe community. Under the project, 
720 candidates are to be trained out of which 285 
Candidates have been trained.
9.8.3.9 Work Based Learning (WBL) programme 
to Strengthen and Empower SC/ST/Women/EWS 
Graduate Engineers through MeitY Institutions
The Project is sponsored by MeitY vide Administrative 
Approval No. L-14011/19/2021-HRD dated 09/03/2022 
with the financial support of Rs. 5140.18 Lakh over 
a period of five (5) years. The main objective of this 
programme is to provide an opportunity to SC/ST/EWS/
Women candidates to acquire Technical Knowledge 
Expansion, Real time Working Skills, Technology Use, 
Problem Solving Skills, Reasoning, Analytical Thinking, 
Interpersonal Skill etc. on PAN India basis. Total 1157 
interns are engaged by NIELIT Centres. 
9.8.3.10 Future Skill Prime project (Programme 
for Reskilling/Up-skilling of IT Manpower for 
Employability)
Project is sponsored by MeitY vide Administrative 
Approval No. 14011/21/2017-HRD (Vol. II) dated 
24/12/2019. Total estimated cost of the project is Rs 
436.87 crore (approx.) with GIA of Rs. 433.21 Crore from 
the Central Government and 3.66 Crore to be incurred by 
NASSCOM over a period of Three (03) Years. The project 
is being implemented at NIELIT Calicut, Kolkata and 
Aurangabad (Lead Centres) and NIELIT Delhi, Agartala, 
Calicut, Gorakhpur, Chennai, Aurangabad, Chandigarh, 
Kolkata, Imphal, Gangtok, Guwahati, Kohima, Patna, 
J&K (Co-Lead Centres) providing training in the 
emerging technologies viz. Artificial Intelligence, Robotic 
Process Automation (RPA), Internet of Things (IoT), 
3D Printing/Additive Manufacturing, Big Data Analytics, 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
246
Virtual Reality/Augmented Reality, Cloud Computing, 
Cyber Security, Block Chain Technology and Social and 
Mobile.
9.8.3.11 Development of Cyber forensic Training cum 
Investigation Labs in North-Eastern States and Cloud 
based centralized Cyber forensics Lab Infrastructure
Project is sponsored by MeitY vide Administrative 
Approval No 12(03)/2019-CSRD, dated 25/03/2020 
with the financial support of Rs. 1692.20 Lakh over a 
period of 5 years. The objective of this project is to setup 
cyber forensic training cum investigation labs in 8 North 
Eastern states equipped with associated cyber forensic 
system and tools. Achievement as on 31.10.2024: - 
 
Set up of Cyber Forensic cum Training Lab at 4 
four locations-Kohima, Agartala, Imphal & Aizawl 
 
Creation of resource portal along with e-learning 
methodologies over cloud and facilities for MIS, 
courseware dissemination, information exchange, 
resource persons/ organizations 
 
 A total of 2198 trainings under (Awareness level, 
Beginners level, Advanced level and Judiciarylevel) 
have been completed. 
 
Creatde a centralized database facility for digital 
crime tool profiling and usage of cyber forensic 
tools & reference library of various cyber forensic 
software tools for evidence extraction and analysis 
for cyber forensics 
 
Design and development of the course curriculum 
and its delivery for various stake holders 
9.8.3.12 Capacity Building and Training on Cutting-
edge technologies for employable youth of Tripura
Project is sponsored by MeitY vide Administrative 
Approval No L-14011/2/2022-HRD, dated 28/03/2022 
with the financial support of Rs. 441.44 Lakh over a period 
of Three (3) years. The project is being implemented 
by NIELIT Agartala with the objective of enabling 
entrepreneurship & sustainable development among 
youth of Tripura by providing Training in cutting-edge 
technologies. Under the project total 3480 candidates 
are to be trained, out of which 1562 candidates have 
been trained so far.
9.8.3.13 Establishment of Design and Assembly Lab 
of solar LED based products
Project is sponsored by MeitY vide Administrative 
Approval No 14016/3/2021-HRD, dated 28/09/2022 with 
the financial support of Rs. 211.20 Lakh over a period 
of Three (3) years. The project is being implemented by 
NIELIT Leh with the objective of setting up a complete 
design and assembling lab of solar LED based products 
like Solar lanterns, Solar street lights etc. Under the 
project, 350 candidates are to be trained, out of which 
185 candidates have been trained and set up of complete 
design and assembling lab of solar LED based products 
is under process.
9.8.3.14 Skilled Manpower Advanced Research and 
Training (SMART) Virtual Prototyping Lab at NIELIT 
Calicut
Skilled Manpower Advanced Research and Training 
(SMART) facility or Virtual Prototyping Lab is set up 
at NIELIT Calicut as part of the Chip to Start-up (C2S) 
programme of MeitY the for proliferation of advanced 
VLSI and Embedded system design training, research 
and electronics systems development across the country.
The ‘SMART’ remote lab facility is available 24x7, and 
the students, researchers, and start-up industries can 
access the facility anytime and anywhere. A total no. of 
38,622 candidates have registered & 13,868 candidates 
have been trained using SMART. 
9.8.3.15 Ultra Low Power SHAKTI RISC V Based 
Lightweight Edge AI Processor for IoT enabled 
Healthcare Applications
Project is sponsored by MeitY vide Administrative 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
247
Approval No EE-9/2/2021-R&D-E, dated 15/01/2024 
with the financial support of Rs.288 Lakh over a period 
of five (5) years. The Project is being implemented by 
NIELIT Aurangabad with the objective of Design and 
Development of Indigenous Edge Al Coprocessor for 
IoT healthcare applications, Design of energy-efficient 
coprocessor capable of seamless integration into various 
healthcare IoT devices & Development of functional 
prototypes of healthcare applications Ieveraging the 
coprocessor’s local data processing capabilities. Under 
the project, setting up of DIR-V based SoC and Embedded 
System Design Labs & the installation of Synopsys, 
CADENCE and Mentor Graphics VLSI Design tools have 
been completed. Achievement as on 31.10.2024: - 
 
Completed high level-design of IoT enabled 
healthcare system and high-level design document 
is prepared.
 
Two conference papers are presented for VDAT 
Conference.
 
Manpower JRF/Project Associate recruitments are 
completed and onboarded.
 
Procurement of sensors for FPGA based system 
integration is under progress.
 
SHAKTHI RISC-V Processor RTL analysis is in 
progress.
 
Conducted FDPs, bootcamps and Skilling programs 
for Airforce officials in VLSI and Embedded systems
9.8.3.16 
Empowering 
Police 
Personnel 
and 
Government Officials of NE States through IT and 
Cyber Security Training : 
Project is sponsored by MeitY vide Administrative 
Approval 
No 
L-14011/7/2023-HRD, 
dated 
26-02-
2024 with the financial support of Rs. 2245.47 Lakhs 
over a period of three (3) years. The Project is being 
implemented by NIELIT Kohima with the objective to 
train Police Personnel and Government Officials of NE 
States through IT and Cyber Security Training through 
a comprehensive training program with setting up IT 
cum Security labs equipped with the latest hardware and 
software at different police headquarters and selected 
districts in NE States. Under the project , 504 Police 
personnel & Govt. officials have been trained out of the 
assigned target of 18,660.
9.8.3.17 Electronics & ICT Academy Scheme, 
Phase-II
Project is sponsored by MeitY vide Administrative 
Approval No L-14011/1/2024-HRD, dated 26-04-2024 
with the financial support of Rs. 9468.82 Lakh over a period 
of five (5) years. The Project is being implemented by 
NIELIT Aurangabad, NIELIT Calicut, NIELIT Gorakhpur 
along with 11 other institutes ( IITs, CDACs & NITs etc.). 
The objective of the project is to conduct faculty/mentor 
training through specialized Faculty Development 
Programs (FDPs) with the vision of MeitY by promoting 
emerging areas of technology and other high priority 
areas that are pillars of both, the “Make in India” and the 
“Digital India” programmes in ITI/Polytechnic. The target 
of the NIELITs is to train 7500 faculties & also to develop 
60 Faculty Development Programs (FDPs) on emerging 
Technologies. Training activities yet to be started.
9.8.3.18 Capacity Building for human resource 
development in Unmanned Aircraft System (Drone 
and related Technology)
Project is sponsored by MeitY vide Administrative 
Approval No L-14011/29/2021-HRD, dated 11.07.2022 
with the financial support of Rs. 89.87 Crore over a 
period of five (5) years. The Project is being implemented 
by NIELIT Aurangabad, NIELIT Bhubaneswar, NIELIT 
Calicut, NIELIT Imphal & NIELIT J&K. The objective of 
the project is to leverage collaborative activities in human 
resource development through capacity building in 
education and training in the area of Unmanned Aircraft 
System (UAS). Under the project, 2196 Candidates are 
trained in 59 Bootcamps, 4 candidates have completed 
PG Diploma course, 03 POCs are approved, 07 PoCs 
are under process and Drone Electronic Labs have been 
set up in all 5 PIS
9.8.3.19 
Skill 
Development 
of 
unemployed 
youths of Odisha, Jharkhand, West Bengal, and 
Bihar for enhancing Employability and enabling 
Entrepreneurship towards Sustainable Development 
of States.
Project is sponsored by MeitY vide Administrative 
Approval No L-14011/8/2023-HRD, dated 24.05.2024 
with the financial support of Rs.5076.39 Lakh over 
a period of three (3) years. The Project is being 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
248
implemented by NIELIT Bhubaneswar, NIELIT Ranchi, 
NIELIT Kolkata & NIELIT Patna. The Objective of the 
project is to conduct free Skill Development programme 
to enhance employability and enable entrepreneurship 
towards sustainable development among youths of 
Odisha, Jharkhand, West Bengal and Bihar through 
various NSQF aligned courses under IT and Electronics 
domain. Training activities yet to be started.
9.8.3.20.  Employability Enhancement & Livelihood 
Training 
Program 
[EELTP] 
of 
SC/ST& 
EWS 
(Women) Youth through Capacity Building and Skill 
Development in IECT
Project is sponsored by MeitY vide Administrative 
Approval No. L-14016/2/2022-HRD, dated 12/10/2022 
with financial support of Rs. 9090.42 Lakh over a period of 
three (03) Years. The project is jointly being implemented 
by 21 NIELIT Centres with the aim of capacity building 
and skill development of SC/ST & EWS (Women) youth in 
IT and Electronics Sectors to enhance their employability 
and livelihood in SC/ST populous districts of States/UTs 
by imparting training in selected futuristic and upskilling 
courses. Under the project, 1798 candidates have been 
trained so far against the total training target of 52,300.
9.8.4. Synergy through Collaborations and MoUsA 
I.	
MoU was signed with NIELIT and Information 
Technology 
Institute 
(ITI), 
Ministry 
of 
Communications and Information Technology 
(MCIT), Egypt on 11th March, 2024. The 
objective is to foster mutual collaboration for 
improving workforce skills, promoting employment 
opportunities, addressing skills gaps, and fostering 
international cooperation. Trainings shall be 
imparted to Egyptian students. 
II.	
MoU was signed with NIELIT and Microsoft 
Corporation Pvt Ltd on 12th Feb, 2024 with the 
objective to enable digital skilling interventions 
and continuous learning framework in Artificial 
Intelligence and extend their existing programs, 
joint programs, skilling interventions and joint 
certification opportunities aligned to the National 
Skills Qualifications Framework (“NSQF”) to enable 
digital transformation of India.
III.	
MoU was signed with NVIDIA on 15th Feb, 2024 
with the objective to work on opportunities to 
address the AI skill development, upskilling and 
reskilling requirement of India, to support the 
IndiaAI Mission of the Government of India.
IV.	
MoU was signed with Uniques Technologies on 
15th Feb, 2024 with the objective to develop skilled 
manpower in the domains of common interest such 
as management, technology, finance, digital skills, 
Cyber Security, Digital Payments etc. through 
participatory mode such as summer internships, 
placements, field visits, workshops, conferences 
etc. 
V.	
MoU was signed with Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Nation 
Law university, Sonepat on 5th Jan, 2024 with 
the objective to develop skilled manpower in the 
domains of Cyber Security, Artificial Intelligent, 
Cyber Law, Cyber forensic etc. through participatory 
mode 
such 
as 
formal, 
non-formal 
training 
programs, summer internships, placements, field 
visits, workshops, conferences etc and exchange 
of Academic and non-Academic staff to their 
respective campus etc.
VI.	
MoU was signed with Erekrut on 13th Feb, 2024 
with the objective to collaborate for enhancing 
employment opportunities for NIELIT students and 
facilitating campus recruitments processes, and 
to connect the institutions students with a diverse 
range of potential employers, thereby achieving 
optimal placement outcomes.
VII.	
MoU was signed with Kyndryl on 13th Feb, 2024 
with the objective to collaborate and work together 
in the areas of skill development, quality education 
and training, content and certifications and any 
other services that may be decided from time to 
time.
VIII.	 MoU was signed with Siddhi Infonet on 15th Feb, 
2024 with the objective establish a collaborative 
relationship between NIELIT and Siddhi Infonet 
Private Limited, aimed to increase industry 
interaction, providing internship and placement 
opportunities to NIELIT students.

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
249
IX.	
MoU was signed with NIELIT and Madhya Pradesh 
State Electronics Development Corporation Ltd 
on 11th March, 2024 for imparting training in Skill 
Development and Capacity Building. All the parties 
also agree for joint execution and implementation 
of future Skill Development / Capacity Building 
Projects
X.	
MoU was signed with NIELIT and National 
Telecommunications Institute for Policy research, 
Innovation and Training on 3rd June, 2024. The 
collaboration is planned to promote mutual 
growth through different initiatives. Key areas of 
collaboration include joint planning and execution 
of Faculty Development Programs, organization of 
national and international events such as workshops 
and conferences, and the provision of specialized 
training in fields like Data Communication, Signal 
Processing, and AI. NIELIT shall also extend its 
Virtual Academy platform, IT infrastructure, and 
Remote Labs to NTIPRIT. The collaboration also 
supports NSQF training and internship programs.
XI.	
MoU was signed with NIELIT and United Service 
Institution of India (USI) on 14th Aug, 2024 to 
develop and implement training programs of 
Cybersecurity, Digital forensics and emerging 
technologies 
for 
Agniveers, 
retired 
defense 
personal and other stakeholders and co-develop 
educational materials and curricula tailored to need 
of military personal and defense stakeholders. 
XII.	
MoU was signed with NIELIT and INTERNSHALA 
(Scholiverse Educare Private Limited) on 05th 
Sept, 2024. The objective to MoU is to enhance 
the internship and employment opportunities, 
collaboration for joint recognition of online skilling 
courses as per industry standards. 
XIII.	 MoU was signed with NIELIT and HireMee (i.e. 
KAAM Service Private Limited) on 05th Sept, 
2024 with the aim to enhance the employment 
opportunities for students by Employbility Skill 
Assessment and felicitating the effective campus 
recruitment drive.
XIV.	 MoU was signed between NIELIT and Directorate 
General of Resettlement (DGR) on 10th Sept, 2024 
with the aim to provide training and capacity building 
of Ex-Serviceman in emerging technologies and 
NSQF align courses and shall offer the virtual 
academy along with virtual lab and smart lab 
facility.
XV.	 MoU was signed between NIELIT and Military 
College 
of 
Telecommunication 
Engineering 
(MCTE) on 26th Sept, 2024. The objective of 
MoU is to establishment of Satellite Campus 
and Accreditation centers, Joint Certification and 
recognition, Customized courses aligning with 
military perspective, access to virtual and smart 
labs.
XVI.	 MoU was signed between NIELIT and Maharashtra 
State Board of Technical Education (MSBTE) on 1st 
Oct, 2024. The focus area of the collaboration is to 
establish Center of Excellence in AI, IoT, Industry 
4.0, 3D printing and allied technologies for capacity 
training and R&D centers in State of Maharashtra.
XVII.	 MoU was signed between NIELIT and Physics 
Wallah Pvt. Ltd. on 10th Oct, 2024. The main 
objective of MoU is to develop skilled manpower in 
the domains of common interest such as Artificial 
Intelligence, Computer Science, Data Science 
and other emerging technologies etc. through 
participatory mode such as summer internships, 
placements, field visits, workshops, conferences 
etc.
9.9 Software Technology Parks of India (STPI)
9.9.1 Introduction
Software Technology Parks of India was set up in 
1991 as an autonomous society under the Ministry of 
Electronics & IT (MeitY), Government of India. STPI’s 
main objective has been the promotion of software 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
250
exports from the country. STPI acts as ‘single-window’ in 
providing services to the software exporters. The services 
rendered by STPI have been statutory services, High 
Speed Data Communication (HSDC) services, State-of-
the-art Incubation services, Information Security Audit 
Service, Project Management & Consultancy services 
and IT Managed services/co-location services to the 
satisfaction of the IT Industry.. STPI has played a key 
developmental role in the promotion of software exports 
with a special focus on SMEs and startup units. Apart 
from this, STPI is also executing various initiatives i.e. 
Centres of Entrepreneurship (CoEs), Next Generation 
Incubation Scheme (NGIS) etc. for promotion of startup 
ecosystem in the country.
STPI has been implementing the Software Technology 
Park (STP) scheme and the Electronics Hardware 
Technology Park (EHTP) scheme for the promotion of 
IT/ITES/ESDM industry. The phenomenal success of 
the IT/ITES industry has been possible, inter-alia, due 
to pivotal role played by the STP Scheme. STP Scheme 
is a unique scheme, designed to promote the software 
industry and growth of Start-Ups and SMEs without any 
locational constraints. As on 31st December,2024, 5097 
units are exporting under the STP scheme and 42 units 
are exporting under EHTP scheme.
Till 31st December,2024, IT/ITES export from STP units 
stands at Rs. 6,68,372.65 crore (tentative) and Electronics 
Hardware export of Rs.5173.48 crore (tentative) under 
EHTP scheme.
9.9.2 STPI Centres
To provide statutory and incubation services to industry, 
major thrust was given on the establishment of new 
centres as well as revamping of existing centres. As 
on date, a total of 65 STPI centres/ Sub-centres are 
operational across the country, out of which 57 centres 
are in Tier II and Tier III cities.
STPI is working closely with the respective State 
Governments/local authorities for creation of more 
space, equipped with state-of–the-art infrastructure 
facilities, for development of the software industry and 
increasing exports. 
Services:
The main services rendered by STPI for the software 
exporting community are as below:
• 
Statutory Services
	
STPI provides Single Window Clearance to 
Software exporters under the STP/EHTP Schemes. 
STP scheme provides these units with various 
benefits making it a phenomenal success.
• 
Incubation Facilities
	
Business and technology incubation stimulate the 
growth of startups. STPI is offering ultra-modern 
office facilities to small units and entrepreneurs. 
Plug-n-Play facilities for startups enable short 
gestation period. This has encouraged many 
entrepreneurs to start their own operations and 
grow in a competitive environment.
• 
Datacom Services
	
One of the STPI’s remarkable contributions to the 
software-exporting sector is provision of High-
Speed Data Communication (HSDC) services. 
STPI has designed and developed state-of-the-
art HSDC network called SoftNET for software 
exporters. Local access to international gateways 
is provided through point-to-point and point-to-
multipoint microwave radios which has overcome 
the last mile problem and enabled STPI to maintain 
an uptime more than 99%.
• 
Consultancy Services
	
STPI 
provides 
consultancy 
and 
Project 
Management Services and turnkey solution to 
various national and International organizations in 
the areas of Communication Networks, Network 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
251
Operation 
Centres, 
Network 
Management 
Systems, 
Computerization, 
e-Governance 
networks etc. The technology capability coupled 
with process strengths has enabled STPI to secure 
a number of projects from time to time.
9.9.3 India BPO Promotion Scheme/North East BPO 
Promotion Scheme
The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY) had launched two BPO Promotion Schemes 
viz. North East BPO Promotion Scheme (NEBPS) and 
India BPO Promotion Scheme (IBPS) in 2015 and 
2016 respectively under Digital India programme. The 
IBPS and NEBPS are aimed at creating employment 
opportunities and promoting investment in IT/ITeS sector 
across the country, particularly in small cities/ towns, 
including rural areas, by incentivizing setting up of 48,300 
and 5,000 seats BPO/ITeS operations with an outlay of 
`493 crore and `50 crore respectively. The seven cities 
with significant level of IT/ITeS activity viz. Bangalore, 
Kolkata, Mumbai, NCR, Pune, Hyderabad and Chennai 
have been excluded from these schemes to expand the 
base of IT/ITeS industry by promoting new economic 
activity. The duration of IBPS and NEBPS was up to 
March 2019 and March 2020 respectively to invite new 
bids, however disbursement may go beyond this period 
as per schemes timelines.
The IBPS and NEBPS provide financial support up to `1 
lakh per seat in the form of Viability Gap Funding (VGF) 
towards Capital and Operational expenditure in three 
yearly installments. The Schemes also provide several 
special incentives within the overall cap of financial 
support (`1 lakh/seat) as under:
Special Incentives: % of eligible financial support (within 
VGF cap)
• 
5% for promoting local entrepreneurs
• 
5% for providing employment to women (at least 
50%)
• 
2% for providing employment to persons with 
disability (at least 4%)
• 
Up to 10% for providing employment beyond target 
• 
5% for setting-up operation at non-Capital location
Under IBPS, till now, 227 BPO/ITES units have set up 
operations, which are distributed across 93 small towns/
cities covering 21 States/UTs. These BPO/ITES units 
have reported direct employment to 52,506 persons. 
Under NEBPS, till now, 19 BPO/ITES units have set up 
operations, which are distributed across 11 locations 
covering 6 States/UTs of NER. These BPO/ITES units 
have reported direct employment of 819 persons.
9.9.4 Centres of Entrepreneurship (CoEs)
For ensuring India builds leadership in the emerging 
technologies such as IoT, Blockchain, FinTech, Artificial 
Intelligence, Augmented & Virtual Reality, Medical 
Electronics & Healthcare, Gaming & Animation, Machine 
Learning, Data Science & Analytics, Cyber Security, 
Chip Designing, ESDM, etc. and to build next wave 
of budding entrepreneurs, STPI is setting up several 
domain-focused CoEs in collaboration with suitable 
partners in various parts of country. These CoEs 
function as single-window facilitation centre with an 
aim to provide comprehensive structural &fundamental 
support including lab & incubation, training, mentoring, 
hand-holding, access to funds, networking, market 
connect etc. through a collaborative effort of Govt. of 
India, various State Govts., Industry, Academia, Domain 
& Technology Experts, Venture Capitalists and other 
startup ecosystem players. This collaborative model of 
the CoEs is further extended with an eminent personality 
from industry/academia/start-ups onboarded as “Chief 
Mentor” who would also act as brand ambassador of the 
CoE.
As on date, STPI has operationalized the following 24 
domain focus CoEs in collaboration with suitable partners 
in various parts of the country:
1.	
Electropreneur Park at Delhi University
2.	
IoT OpenLab at STPI-Bengaluru
3.	
FINBLUE at STPI-Chennai
4.	
Electropreneur Park, an ESDM CoE at STPI- 
Bhubaneswar
5.	
NEURON at STPI-Mohali
6.	
VARCoE at IIT Bhubaneshwar
7.	
IMAGE at STPI-Hyderabad

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
252
8.	
APIARY at STPI-Gurugram
9.	
MOTION at STPI-Pune
10.	
MedTech at SGPGI Lucknow
11.	
Atal Incubation Centre (AIC) at STPI-Bengaluru
12.	
OctaNE - IoT in Agriculture CoE at STPI-Guwahati
13.	
OctaNE - Animation CoE at STPI-Shillong
14.	
OctaNE - AR/VR CoE at STPI-Imphal
15.	
OctaNE - IT Applications in Health care &AgriTech 
CoE at STPI-Gangtok
16.	
OctaNE - GIS Applications including Drone Tech 
CoE at STPI-Itanagar
17.	
OctaNE - IT Applications in Graphic Design CoE at 
STPI-Kohima
18.	
OctaNE – Gaming & Entertainment CoE at STPI- 
Aizawl
19.	
OctaNE - Data Analytics & AI CoE at STPI-Agartala
20.	
Efficiency Augmentation CoE at Bengaluru 
21.	
FASAL at Dr. Panjabrao Deshmukh Krishi 
Vidyapeeth Akola
22.	
Kalpatru at RINL Visakhapatnam
23.	
Emerging Technology CoE at Bhubaneswar & 
Satellite Centre at BPUT, Rourkela
24.	
FinGlobe – FinTech CoE at Gandhinagar, Gujrat.
The STPI CoEs are enabling a 360-degree support 
ecosystem in the form of state of art Infrastructure, hand 
holding & funding support, Mentoring & Networking 
opportunities to nurture innovative start-ups in emerging 
technologies and making India a “Product Nation”. 
Collectively, 24 operationalized CoEs through well-
publicized Open challenge programs and contests have 
selected a total of 1776 startups, out of which 745 are 
onboarded. 
As a result of this, these start-ups have transformed their 
brilliant ideas into 1218 path-breaking products, 479 
IPRs created and have showcased 1567 prototypes.
9.9.5 Modified Electronics Manufacturing Cluster 
(EMC 2.0) Scheme 
The EMC 2.0 scheme was notified on 1st April 2020 
with an implementation period of 8 years (i.e., up to 
March 2028). The objective of the EMC 2.0 scheme is 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
253
to create a comprehensive supply chain/ecosystem for 
strengthening electronics manufacturing base, attract 
Anchor Units to set up production along with their supply 
chain, build world class plug-n-play infrastructure and 
reduce the infrastructure & logistics cost. Total budgetary 
support for the scheme is Rs. 3,762 crores. STPI is the 
Project Management Agency (PMA) for implementation 
of the scheme. 
The financial assistance that are entitled under EMC 2.0 
are as stated below:
•	
EMC project: Up to 50% of project cost with ceiling of 
`70 crore for every 100 acres of land. Overall financial 
assistance for an EMC project cannot exceed `350 
crore per project.
•	
Common Facility Centre (CFC): Up to 75% of project 
cost with ceiling of `75 crore per project.
This scheme will bring huge investment to India so 
that India can become the topmost destination in 
Electronics Manufacturing. The scheme is open for 
receipt of applications till 31st March 2024 and 31 
applications have been received on EMC 2.0 portal.
As on  31st December,2024, eight (8) EMC projects at 
Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Maharashtra, Karnataka, 
Telangana, Tamil Nadu and Uttarakhand and one CFC 
project at Telangana have been approved.
9.9.6 Next Generation Incubation Scheme (NGIS)
NGIS has a vision to drive the rise of India as a Software 
Product Nation so as to make it a global player in 
development, production and supply of Innovative, 
Efficient and Secure Software Products (including 
embedded software) thus facilitating the growth across 
the entire spectrum of ICT sector as envisioned in the 
National Policy on Software Products (NPSP)–2019. 
NGIS is operationalized from 12 Tier-II locations of India 
viz. Agartala, Bhilai, Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, Dehradun, 
Guwahati, Jaipur, Lucknow, Prayagraj, Mohali, Patna 
& Vijayawada with an aim to support 300 start-ups/
Entrepreneurs/SMEs in the field of IT/ITeS/ESDM and 
generate 50+ patent/IPRs from them over a period of 3 
years. NGIS has a total budgetary outlay of INR 95.03 
Cr.
NGIS’s partners & stakeholders include MeitY, STPI 
etc. as well as a vast spectrum of industry, academia, 
investment & funding agencies to support the innovative 
product-focused start-ups in the most comprehensive 
manner. 19 challenge programs (CHUNAUTI - Challenge 
Hunt Under NGIS for Advanced Uninhibited Technology 
Intervention) have been successfully concluded. A total 
of 626 startups have received support in the form of 
mentoring, stipends, and seed funding. Out of this, 115 
startups have been disbursed seed fund, 359 startups 
have been extended stipend, and all 626 startups have 
been mentored. As of 31st December 2024, the beneficiary 
startups of NGIS have cumulatively developed 826 
products, filed 220 Patents and generated employment 
of 7003. Additionally, more challenge programs may be 
launched in the future.
Under this scheme, to support startups Tech Startups 
in the scaling stage & growth stage from across India, 
especially from Tier 2 & 3 cities, a new initiative LEAP 
AHEAD (Launchpad for Tech Entrepreneurs towards 
Accelerated Growth and Pioneering AHEAD) was 
launched in this year. The objective of LEAP AHEAD 
is to identify & support tech startups through high-
quality mentorship, scaleup funding in co-investment 
model, and letting startups establish global connections. 
Tech Startups in the scaling or growth stage aiming 
product diversification or planning expansion into new 
geographical locations benefited from mentoring and 
funding support under this initiative. Out of 546 completed 
applications received from 27 States/UTs. following 
multi-tier screening & evaluation process, 87 startups 
were finally selected for LEAP AHEAD 1st Edition. These 
87 Startups undergone intensive 3-month mentoring 
program, 22 startups got the opportunity of global 
connect, and 17 startups have received investment from 
various investors including NextGen Technology Fund–I.
27 investors partnered with STPI through MoUs and 
assisted LEAP AHEAD startups in raising funds and 
these investors along with NextGen Technology Fund – I 
issued multiple term sheets to these startups.
2nd Edition of LEAP AHEAD has been launched on 15th 
October 2024 with last date for application submission 
15th January 2025.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
254
9.9.7 Promotion of Small and Medium Entrepreneurs 
by creating a conducive environment in the field of 
Information Technology
STPI has been promoting SMEs and their cause 
by offering incubation services, organizing events, 
sponsoring/co-sponsoring events, participation in events 
and export promotion efforts. 
Some of the major events in which STPI participated/
sponsored include:
 
Interactive session for startups on World Intellectual 
Property Day (26th April 2024) organized by STPI 
Neuron CoE.
 
ICAI’s Startup Sphere 2024 event, held between 
27th to 29th June 2024 at Karnataka Trade 
Promotion Organization (KTPO), Bengaluru.
 
Second Edition of CII Vidarbha IT Conclave 2024 
held on 27 July 2024 at Nagpur.
 
4th edition of the Digital Senate Summit held on 
11th September 2024 at Delhi.
 
India Mobile Congress 2024 held from 15th to 18th 
October 2024 at Delhi
 
India Blockchain Summit 2024 held on 19th 
October 2024 at Delhi
 
Singapore Fintech Festival 2024 held from 6th to 
8th November 2024 at Singapore Expo
 
IndiaJoy 2024 held from 13th to 17th November 
2024 at Hyderabad
 
Cloud Data Centre India 2024 10th Annual 
Conference held on 14th November 2024 at Delhi
 
The International Conference on Cybernation & 
Computation (CYBERCOM 2024) held on 15th 
November 2024 at Dehradun
 
STPI co-hosted the Bengaluru Tech Summit 2024 
held from 19th to 21st November 2024 at Bengaluru
 
15th Agrovision India held from 22nd to 25th 
November 2024 at Nagpur
 
Digital Bharat Summit 2024 held on 29th November 
2024 at Delhi
 
Bharat Defence Summit 2024 held on 6th 
December at Delhi
 
STPI co-organized the 1st NE Tech Summit held 
on 9th December 2024 in Kohima, Nagaland
 
STPI co-hosted 9th TiE Global Summit 2024 held 
from 9th to 11th December 2024 at Bengaluru 
 
22nd Edition of CII Connect 2024 held on 17th & 18th 
December 2024 in Chennai.
9.9.8 Startup Accelerator of MeitY for Product 
Innovation, Development, and Growth (SAMRIDH) 
Programme 
The Startup Accelerator of MeitY for Product Innovation, 
Development, and Growth (SAMRIDH) programme was 
launched in August, 2021 for a period of three years 
(further extended for one year) to accelerate around 300 
Startups through existing and upcoming Accelerators. 
At present, under the SAMRIDH programme, 175 
startups have been selected and accelerated through 22 
selected accelerators spread across 12 states of India, 
in the focused areas of Health-tech, Ed-tech, Agri-tech, 
Consumer-tech, Fin-tech, Software as a Service (SaaS), 
and Sustainability.
Meity launched the second cohort of SAMRIDH on 
4th September, 2024 to support 125 startups through 
potential accelerators.
9.9.9 Innovation Challenge for the Development of 
Indian Video Conferencing Solution 
MeitY has announced “Innovation Challenge for 
Development of a Video Conferencing Solution” 
under the “Digital India Programme” in April, 2020 for 
Indian startups/entrepreneurs to develop indigenous 
videoconferencing software applications for use by the 
Government.
• 
The “Techgentsia Software Technologies Pvt. 
Ltd. (Product name: Vconsol)” was declared as 
winner of the innovative challenge and MeitY 
entrusted NIC to roll out the Vconsol service for the 
Government of India.
The following three potential VC solutions start-ups 
were also selected for the Video Conferencing solution 
development:
• 
M/s Instrive Soft labs Pvt Ltd (Product Name: 
HydraMeet) 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
255
• 
M/s Sarv Webs Pvt. Ltd. (Product Name: Sarv 
Wave) 
• 
M/s People Link Unified Communications Pvt Ltd’ 
(Product name: Insta VC) 
NIC has created a secure infrastructure for “Vconsol” 
product at National Data Centre New Delhi with a 
capacity of around 1000 concurrence users and started 
rolling out the services for the Government of India uses 
in the brand name of “BharatVC”. More than 3 Lakh VC 
meetings have been held on Bharat VC as on July 31, 
2024. 
9.9.10 Centre of Entrepreneurship on Industry 4.0 at 
Rashtriya ISPAT Nigam Ltd. - Visakhapatnam Steel 
Plant (RINL-VSP)
The demand for Industry 4.0 products and solutions is 
going to rise exponentially in the backdrop of growing 
Industrial 
Automation. 
Strengthening 
domestic 
capabilities of Industry 4.0 products & solutions will take 
the domestic industry up the value chain significantly by 
way of an increase in products, patents & IPR. In order to 
boost start-ups in these fields, a Centre of Excellence in 
the field of Industry 4.0 at RINL Visakhapatnam has been 
established. It will nurture around 175 innovative startups 
over a period of five years. 
The CoE facility includes an area of 6,000 Sq.ft. with the 
state-of-the-art incubation facility housed on the campus 
of RINL-VSP. This CoE has domain-specific physical 
laboratories like IIoT, AI/ML & AR/VR and Industrial 
Automation, Robotics, Drone & 3D printing setup with 
the required equipment and software in the domain 
to support the startups. So far, 10 startups have been 
onboarded, resulting in the development of 3 prototypes, 
2 products by these start-ups.
9.9.11 iTamil Nadu Technology (iTNT) Hub in Chennai 
The iTNT Hub in Chennai has been established with a 
total outlay of `54.61 crores with MeitY’s contribution 
of `27 crores over a period of five years. The primary 
objective of Tamil Nadu Technology Hub is to nurture the 
deep/emerging tech innovation ecosystem in Tamil Nadu 
that can guide, develop, implement and support startups, 
especially in the scaling-up phase in Deep Tech. The iTNT 
Hub shall support 200 start-ups in the hub & spoke model 
and provide acceleration and infrastructural service. In 
addition, 200 numbers of start-ups will be accelerated in 
deep tech/emerging tech. So far, 24 startups have been 
incubated and 6 products launched by these startups.
9.10	 Digital India Corporation (DIC)
9.10.1 Introduction
Digital India Corporation (DIC) is a not-for-profit company 
set up & promoted by the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY), Govt. of India. The 
Company leads & guides in realising the vision, objectives 
and goals of the Digital India program. It provides strategic 
support to Ministries / Departments of Centre / States 
to carry forward the mission of Digital India by way of 
capacity building for e-Governance projects, promoting 
best practices, encouraging Public-Private Partnerships 
(PPP), nurturing innovations and technologies in various 
domains.
The company encompasses 7 Independent Business 
Divisions (IBDs) viz. KIDIC Core or Technology 
Development & Deployment Division (TDDD), NeGD 
(National e-Governance Division), MyGov, MeitY Startup 
Hub (MSH), India Semiconductor Mission (ISM), Digital 
India Bhashini Division (DIBD) and INDIAai.
9.10.2 DIC Core or Technology Development & 
Deployment Division 
9.10.2.1 Poshan Tracker
‘Poshan Tracker’ is a mobile-based application for 
dynamic identification of stunting, wasting, and under-
weight prevalence among children and last-mile tracking 
of nutrition service delivery by Anganwadi Workers at 
Anganwadi centres. The application has further been 
made available to State Officials with the integration 
of the Supportive Supervision Application and also to 
beneficiaries through the new Beneficiary interface.
The work undertaken in the area of Process Re-
engineering for Digital Transformation:
A.	
Face Capture and Authentication in SNP 
distribution: The Poshan Tracker is equipped with 
the new face capture and authentication feature 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
256
to ensure that nutritional services are provided to 
genuine beneficiaries. The implementation of the 
feature in the Poshan Tracker is a significant step 
towards ensuring transparency and accountability 
in the distribution of services, ultimately leading to 
better nutrition outcomes for the target groups.
B.	
Beneficiary e-KYC allows Anganwadi Workers 
(AWW) to complete the e-KYC (electronic Know 
Your Customer) process for beneficiaries. This 
feature aims to streamline the verification process 
and ensure that benefits are delivered efficiently 
and accurately. It makes it simple for AWWs to 
verify beneficiaries’ identities using electronic 
methods, ensuring accurate and up-to-date 
records, faster access to benefits, and a secure 
and reliable process. 
C.	
Keycloak Module has been implemented to make 
logging into the Poshan Tracker easier and safer. 
Keycloak is used to provide a login facility for the 
application. Roles are managed on Keycloak and 
based on role user can switch their application 
behaviour. One can use multiple applications to 
login via Keycloak with the same user credentials. 
It makes the app more secure, preventing 
unauthorized access and keeping user data safe. 
Additionally, Keycloak has also been implemented 
in the Supportive Supervision application for State 
Officials.
D.	
Beneficiary interface has been provided in 
the Poshan Tracker application to enable the 
beneficiaries (users) to register themselves directly 
on the app.
	
•	
Self-Registration Made Simple: This mini-
mizes the dependency on Anganwadi Work-
ers for manual registration.
	
•	
Approval by Anganwadi Workers: Once a 
beneficiary registers, the request is sent to 
the Anganwadi worker, to verify and approve 
the registration. 
	
•	
Access to Personal Information and Ser-
vices: Beneficiaries can view their service 
history, which includes information about the 
child’s health and development, like height 
and weight tracking and details about the 
nutritional support they received, based on 
their eligibility or category
E.	
Supportive Supervision Application has been 
integrated with the Poshan Tracker 
	
Key features of Supportive Supervision (SS):
	
i.	
Real-Time Monitoring and Support: Su-
pervisors can access real-time data to pro-
vide instant support to AWCs, including:
	
	
a.	
AWC open status with timestamps.
	
	
b.	
Live access to the AWW dashboard.
	
	
c.	
Correction of growth monitoring data.

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
257
	
ii.	
Visit Planning and Scheduling: State of-
ficials can plan and schedule visits with de-
fined objectives and goals, ensuring regular 
monitoring at pre-defined intervals.
	
iii.	
Automated Analysis for Improvement: 
The application provides automated insights 
and analysis visit inputs to identify areas for 
improvement and track quality indicators.
	
iv.	
Self-Assessment Interface: dedicated in-
terface for supervisors and officials to con-
duct self-assessments.
	
v.	
Performance Review: State officials can 
easily review the performance of their imme-
diate subordinates, ensuring accountability 
across levels.
	
vi.	
Learning Resources: Provides easy ac-
cess to learning capsules and training mate-
rials within the application to enhance knowl-
edge and skills.
F.	
Protocol for Management of Malnutrition in 
Children (CMAM): The CMAM protocol monitors 
and manages cases of severely malnourished 
children aged 0-6 years with a focus of identifying, 
treating, and managing malnourished children 
both at Anganwadi Centres and in communities. 
CMAM protocol helps in determining when to refer 
a malnourished child to Nutritional Rehabilitation 
Centre (NRC)/ medical facility. The protocol also 
outlines the steps for identification, management, 
referral, care level decision-making, nutritional 
and medical management, and follow-up at the 
Anganwadi level.
G.	
Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE): 
In the endeavor to reposition Anganwadi Centre 
(AWC) to become the first village output for 
health, nutrition, and early learning with adequate 
infrastructure and human resources, appropriate 
provisions have been brought on to the Poshan 
Tracker application for ground-level dissemination 
and implementation of ECCE in every Anganwadi 
Centre. The purpose of Early Childhood Care and 
Education (ECCE) is to ensure responsive care, 
early learning and development which includes 
physical and motor; language, cognitive, socio-
personal, emotional and creative and aesthetic 
appreciation. It encompasses the inseparable 
elements of care, health, nutrition, play and 
early learning within a protective and enabling 
environment.
H.	
Stock Register Module introduced wherein the 
Anganwadi worker will be able to keep track of 
the Supplementary Nutrition Programme stock 
(Take Home Ration-THR/ Hot Cooked Meal-HCM) 
required, received and distributed for the month 
in the Anganwadi Centre (AWC). The new Stock 
Register module displays the THR and HCM stock 
requirements based on the beneficiary type in the 
AWC. The Anganwadi Worker is also provided with 
an additional feature to enter the THR and HCM 
Stock received in the AWC date wise. The Stock 
Register module has inbuilt capability to keep track 
and update the SNP stock distributed based on the 
daily THR/CM distribution as part of the AWC daily 
tracking of beneficiaries.
I.	
Family Details: The register provides an insight into 
the number of families registered at the Anganwadi 
Centre, total members in each family, resident 
Type (Temporary/Permanent) and category wise 
count of the beneficiaries. It also provides details 
such as family number (which is unique), name of 
the family member, their relationship with the head 
of the family, gender, marital status, DOB, age, 
beneficiary type, resident type, religion, and their 
willingness to avail ICDS services like SNP and 
PSE.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
258
J.	
Growth Chart: The Growth Chart section has been 
enhanced to enable the Anganwadi workers to 
view a child’s complete growth monitoring history. 
AWW can now access growth records from the 
child’s first monitoring date to the current date.
K.	
Beneficiary Vaccination module added in the 
application to enable the Anganwadi Worker 
to keep track of the vaccination status of the 
beneficiaries. The module enables the Anganwadi 
worker to monitor the beneficiaries upcoming 
vaccinations schedule, vaccinations that are 
completed and vaccinations that are overdue. The 
module also provides a vaccination profile of the 
beneficiary wherein the details of vaccinations due 
and vaccinations given are listed date wise.
L.	
Heat Map section has been added to the PT 
dashboard wherein users can view different 
indicator statistics on national and state level on 
India map view. Users based on their login rights 
are able to select State to check stats based on 
different colors. Each colour indicates a different 
range which is mentioned in the legend bar. 
There are different indicators like AWC open, 
Morning snacks, Home visits, Growth Monitoring, 
SNP distributed, SAM, MAM, Wasting children. 
Stats are also shown in tabular form which can 
be downloaded in csv format. Users can check/
compare the stats on bar graph format. National, 
State and District average is shown on a bar graph 
to compare the stats. Users are able to drill down 
till AWC level in the bar graph. There is a third 
option which is trend analysis in which users can 
compare stats of the entire year on a monthly stats 
basis. 
M.	
Growth Trends shows trends of children’s health 
status in a selected quarter. It showcases health 
status numbers in tabular form and users can 
download beneficiary details on district level. 
Additionally, health status of Stunting, Underweight 
and Wasting health status are also provided.
N.	
Head Count will enable the AWW to capture group 
photograph of the children during morning atten-
dance and the module will showcase the count 
of children. AWW and State Officials can use this 
count to tally attendance of children in the AWC.
O.	
Suposhit Gram Panchayat page provides an 
option to State Officials to nominate a Gram 
Panchayat for award. A listing of all eligible Graph 
Panchayats is showcased and State Officials can 
filter Gram Panchayat based on District or Block 
level and then nominate a Gram Panchayat. 
The interface also provides the view to State 
Officials wherein they can see all nominated Gram 
Panchayats. Additionally, the option for deletion 
of nominated Gram Panchayat is also available. 
National users can also see all nominated Gram 
Panchayats on PAN India level.
9.10.2.2 Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme for Electronics & 
IT
MeitY, with the approval of the Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs (CCEA) had initiated ‘Visvesvaraya 
PhD Scheme’ with the objective to enhance the number 
of PhDs in Electronics System Design & Manufacturing 
(ESDM) and IT/IT Enabled Services (IT/ITES) sectors in 
the country in 2014.  
Phase-I of Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme with a budget of 
`466 Crores, initially approved for 9 years from 2014, 
is extended till Mar 2025. Based on assessment of 
Phase-I, demand from the institutions and role of such 
scheme in strengthening research eco-system, Phase-
II of Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme, was initiated with an 
outlay of `481.93 Crore for 9 years w.e.f. Academic Year 
2022-23.The scheme is being implemented by DIC. 
9.10.2.3 DIKSHA (Digital Infrastructure for Knowledge 
Sharing)
DIKSHA (Digital Infrastructure for Knowledge Sharing- 
https://diksha.gov.in/) is a national platform for school 
education, an initiative of National Council for Educational 
Research and Training (NCERT), under the aegis of 
the Ministry of Education (MoE), GoI. DIKSHA can be 
accessed by learners & teachers across the country and 
currently supports over 30 languages and the various 
curricula of NCERT, CBSE and States/UTs across 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
259
India. The platform is being leveraged and developed 
for school education, foundational learning programs 
and to support inclusive learning for underserved and 
differently-abled communities of learners and teachers.
DIKSHA is developed on open-source technology and 
deployed on the cloud platform. DIC provides technical 
administration and manages the Cloud of DIKSHA 
platform. 
Key Solutions / Use-cases of DIKSHA
DIKSHA is a flexible and evolving platform that continues 
to expand, based on the aggregated needs of the 
various states/UTs and overall ecosystem. DIKSHA 
infrastructure also follows a modular approach by design 
and the core building blocks of DIKSHA have enabled 
some successful use-cases such as:
1.	
Energized Textbooks - Physical Textbooks to 
Phygital Textbooks.
	
•	
DIKSHA has over 6,800 unique ETBs on the 
platform being consumed nationwide. These 
ETBs provide students with quality learn-
ing materials, contributing to their academic 
growth - aligned to each academic Board, 
Medium, Grade, Subject and Chapter con-
cepts.
2.	
Online Courses for Teachers and Students 
(with Digital Credentials) 
 
•	
To ensure continuity of training & capacity 
building, several programs were rolled out 
at centre as well as states/ UTs focusing 
on digital training. DIKSHA contains around 
20,677 capacity-building courses attracting 
over 18.04 Crores enrolments and result-
ing in generation of over 12.44 crore digitally 
verifiable certificates.
	
•	
NISHTHA i.e. National Initiatives for School 
Heads and Teacher’s Holistic Development, 
is a nationwide capacity building program by 
NCERT which is also conducted online on 
DIKSHA.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
260
3.	
Question Bank Tool 
4.	
Content Sourcing Tool - Engage, Contribute and 
Curate with Ecosystem (VidyaDaan)
5.	
Content Authoring Tool: Apart from content 
sourcing tools, DIKSHA also has a content 
authoring tool which allows teachers or users, 
designated by centre or state departments, to 
create interactive digital content. 
6.	
Quiz - Making Learning Fun: 
7.	
Content Consumption Tools - Multi-device and 
multi-modal user access
	
•	
DIKSHA provides access to over 3,66,000 
digital resources, available in more than 126 
languages, catering to the diverse educa-
tional needs of users.
8.	
Data Tools 
9.	
Chatbot Tools
10.	
Digital Credentials 
The impact of DIKSHA’s offerings is evident in the 
numbers, with over 558 Crores learning sessions 
facilitated on the platform till date.
9.10.2.4 AAINA – Dashboard for cities for Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs
AAINA - Dashboard for cities is an initiative of the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, which would 
serve as a tool for comparing similarly placed ULBs 
(Urban Local Bodies) and promoting peer learning 
amongst ULBs. These dashboards will inspire the ULBs 
by pointing to possibilities and areas of improvement and 
providing them the opportunity to learn and engage with 
frontrunners. 
AAINA portal will provide information on status and 
progress of the ULBS on five broad thematic areas 
viz. Political and Administrative Structure, Finance, 
Planning, Citizen Centric Governance and Delivery 
of Basic Services. AAINA Portal was launched on 
November 14, 2023 for ULB’s to fill the data across 5 
thematic areas. 
As on 31st December 2024, 1081 ULBs have submitted 
the data and around 871 ULBs are under various stages 
of filling the data.
9.10.2.5 Gov.in AppStore
The GOV.IN AppStore is India’s official platform for 
hosting mobile applications that deliver public services. 
It streamlines access to government services across 
sectors like health, education, finance, and more, 
ensuring users can download and use apps anytime, 
anywhere. Accessible through both its website and 
mobile app, GOV.IN AppStore empowers developers 
and enhances service delivery for citizens nationwide.
Key milestones include the onboarding of 2,200 
applications and over 8,000 developers. The total 
number of downloads reached 119,397, while 133,785 
new users were onboarded.
Progress made during the year: 
The knowledge transfer of the project taken from 
C-DAC, Mumbai including handover of user portal and 
Admin portal. The user acceptance testing conducted 
and cloud setup. The User Interface & Experience (UI/
UX) has been revamped for both web as well as android 
app with improved accessibility, voice search option, 
location-based personalization, improved navigation and 
onboarding flow. CERT-In certified agencies have been 
engaged for vulnerability assessment and penetration 
testing of the website as well as android app.
9.10.2.6 LokOS: Digitizing Self-Help Groups (SHGs) 
in India 
The Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana - National Rural 
Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NRLM), under the Ministry 
of Rural Development, Government of India, aims 
to eradicate rural poverty by empowering SHGs and 
strengthening livelihoods. It has a vast network of 10+ 
crore SHG members across 93+ lakh SHGs, utilizing 
various digital systems for transaction capture and MIS at 
state and national levels, including state-specific portals.
LokOS, introduced by NRLM, is a community-centric 
digital platform designed to enhance SHG operations by 
digitizing transactions, records, and financial activities 
of Community-Based Organizations (CBOs). Built on 
a microservices-based, federated architecture, LokOS 
aims to improve data accuracy at the source and 
strengthen the central NRLM MIS. Key modules and 
applications under LokOS ecosystem:

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
261
•	
Transaction Module
•	
Digital Ajeevika Register
•	
Village Prosperity and Resilience Plan
•	
Producers Group Portal
•	
Training Module
•	
Saksham, e-FMAS & FDM applications
•	
Project Activities Monitoring & Tracking Module
•	
Centralized User Management Module
•	
Cadre Training & Management
Impact and Reach
LokOS supports:
•	
10.58 crore SHG Members
•	
93 lakh Self Help Groups
•	
5.2 lakh Village Organizations
•	
31,000 Cluster Level Federations
It also enables real-time tracking of the Lakhpati Didi 
Initiative, with:
•	
2.92 crore potential Lakhpati Didis identified
•	
3.2 crore entries captured in the Digital Aajeevika 
Register
By enhancing transparency, efficiency, and digital 
access, LokOS is transforming rural livelihoods through 
data-driven decision-making and real-time monitoring.
9.10.2.7 Customization, Enhancement & Deployment 
of Digital Solutions for Empowerment of Citizens of 
North-East India
DIC has taken up the project with the objective to empower 
the citizens of North-East India by providing digital 
solutions to ease their job and enhance their productivity 
& livelihood with a special focus on Farmers, Artisans, 
Weavers and Teachers (special schools). The project is 
focused on deploying DIC technologies / applications in 
the area of ICT in Agriculture, Embroidery & Weaving 
and Differently Abled which have lots of potential for 
large-scale deployment in all the North-Eastern States 
for the benefit of farmers, women, embroidery artisans, 
weavers and teachers of special schools. To achieve 
the proposed objective, three technology components 
have been identified for necessary customization and 
following deployment based on its usability and potential 
in North-East Region. 
Component 1: Interactive Information Dissemination 
System (IIDS): Empowering Agri Institutions & Farmers
Manipur: Loumisingi Paojel
The sub-component has been taken up in collaboration 
with the College of Agriculture, Central Agricultural 
University Imphal to empower the farmers by providing 
the right information at the right time through mobile-
based agro-advisory system. 
During the period, the following activities were undertaken: 
Total 32 Awareness Programme was conducted and 
1,336 farmers were registered, and with this, total 
11,000+ farmers have been registered under the project. 
2,06,189 text messages (consuming 4,13,579 SMS) and 
1,682 voice messages were sent to registered farmers in 
the local language on various aspects of agriculture and 
animal husbandry. 16,749 calls were received on Toll-
Free number and 43,353 outbound calls were made for 
registration, advisory and enquires purpose.
Meghalaya: Integration and Application of UAV for 
Crop Health Assessment and Monitoring with IIDS in 
Providing Evidence Based Agro-Advisory Services 
to Farmers of North-East India (DHaBReT)
The sub-component has been taken-up in collaboration 
with North-East Space Application Center and College of 
Post Graduate Studies in Meghalaya to develop a model 
for enhancement of the farm productivity by providing 
evidence based agro-advisory services generated by 
UAV data and integrating with IIDS platform. During the 
project period following activities were undertaken:
•	
UAV Aerial Surveys have been conducted using 
RGB and Multispectral cameras for the six crops 
viz., (1) Cabbage (5.8 Km2 approx.), (2) Cauliflower 
(4.5 Km2 approx.), (3) Paddy (5.7 Km2 approx.), 
(4) Ginger (5.8 Km2 approx.), (5) Pineapple (7.9 
Km2 approx.), and (6) Turmeric (6.1 Km2 approx.) 
Generated ortho-products such as - 3D Point 
Clouds, Digital Surface Models (DSM), Digital 
Terrain Models (DTM) & Orthomosaic Images of 
all the project agricultural fields. 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
262
•	
A Prototype has been developed for one crop 
(cabbage) to reflect basic information of farmer 
and their farm details (Data collected through UAV) 
to the Agri Experts while delivering the advisory to 
the farmers through IIDS platform. The prototype is 
being refined.
Glimpses of UAV Data integrated with IIDS platform
Arunachal Pradesh: Arik Abik Lumon
The sub-component has been taken up in collaboration 
with the College of Horticulture and Forestry, (CoH&F), 
Pasighat, Arunachal Pradesh to empower the farmers 
by providing right information at the right time through 
mobile-based agro-advisory system. 
During the period, the following activities were 
undertaken: Total 29 awareness programmes, and 29 
Training programmes / Health Camps were conducted 
benefiting 1,838 farmers. During the year, 1,156 farmers 
were registered and with this total 7,213 farmers 
have been registered under the project. 3,29,659 text 
messages (consuming 6,33,071 SMS) and 3,90,208 
voice messages were sent to registered farmers in the 
local language on various aspects of agriculture and 
animal husbandry. 39,708 calls were received on the 
Toll-Free number and 17,676 outbound calls were made 
for registration, advisory and enquiry purposes.
Sikkim: Jaivik Varta
The sub-component has been taken up in collaboration 
with the College of Agricultural Engineering & Post 
Harvest Technology (CoAE&PHT), Ranipool, Gangtok, 
Sikkim to empower the farmers by providing the right 
information at the right time through mobile-based agro-
advisory system. 
During the period, the following activities were 
undertaken: Total 30 awareness programme and 35 
Training programmes / Health Camps were conducted 
benefiting 2,433 farmers. During the year, 1,385 farmers 
were registered and with this total 7,000 farmers have 
been registered under the project. 10,11,802 text 
messages (consumed 19,41,612 SMS) and 2,03,277 
voice messages were sent to registered farmers in the 
local language on various aspects of agriculture and 
animal husbandry. 13,668 calls were received on the 
Toll-Free number and 16,963 outbound calls were made 
for registration, advisory and enquiry purposes.
•	
Component 2: CAD Tools (DigiBunai™ & 
DigiKadhai): Empowering Weavers, Designers 
& Artisans 
Digital India Corporation (DIC) has implemented CAD 
applications (DigiBunai™ and Chic™ CAD Plus) in the 
Handloom & Handicraft sectors, aiming to enhance 
the skills and productivity of weavers, designers, and 
artisans across North-East India. These applications 
have been tailored to meet the specific requirements of 
the region, with CAD labs established in Assam, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh, and Sikkim to 
support their effective use.
To further promote these technologies, DIC, in 
collaboration with its training partner, the Textile Sector 
Skill Council (TSC), has organized 33 awareness-building 
workshops for local weavers, designers, artisans, and 
students. These workshops aimed to introduce CAD tools 
and their practical applications in handloom designing. 
A total of 721 handloom weavers, designers, students, 
and artisans have received hands-on training on these 
technologies, leading to the creation of over 600 digital 
designs.
•	
Component 
3: 
Punarjjani™: 
Empowering 
Teachers of Special Schools & Children with 
Intellectual Disabilities. It is a web-based tool that 
assists Special Teachers in the assessment of 
children (6 -18 years of age group) with Intellectual 
Disabilities (IDs)

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
263
The project includes implementation of the tool in 19 
Special / Inclusive Schools in the North East region of the 
country through training of Special Educators, requisite 
hardware support for Special / Inclusive Schools, 
incentives for Special Educators and follow-ups. 
Follow-ups 
with 
the 
Schools/Special 
Educators 
encouraging them to use the tool are going on.
Hardware support for Special / Inclusive Schools
Empowers special teachers for easy, efficient, quick and 
regular assessment, evaluation & monitoring of children 
with IDs:
•	
Training & Technical support provided to Special 
/ Inclusive Schools and they were encouraged to 
upload case records of children with IDs.
•	
No. of Special / Inclusive Schools registered in 
Punarjjani web tool has reached 19 
•	
No. of Children with ID registered has reached 
1,158
•	
No. of Special Teachers using the tool has reached 
145
The Assamese version of the tool has been made 
available as per the feedback of the Teachers.
9.10.2.8 Kisan Sarathi 2.0 - Enhancement, Operations, 
Maintenance and Support.
The project has been taken up in partnership with the 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) to 
facilitate farmers location-specific ‘Demand Based Tele 
Agriculture Advisories’ in their local languages through 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs).
Following are the progress of the project during the 
period:
•	
A total of 740+ Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs)/ 
District Agricultural Advisory and Transfer of 
Technology Centers (DAATTCs) have been on-
boarded.
•	
During this period, 228 KVK experts were enrolled, 
with a total of more than 3,066 Subject Matter 
Experts also on-boarded for the implementation of 
Kisan Sarathi from all states and UTs.
•	
79.56+ Lakh new farmers were registered during 
this period, bringing the total to 247.74+ Lakh 
farmers registered in the system.
•	
51,609+ calls were received from farmers, with a 
total of 2,08,183+ calls received to date
•	
During the period 17.14 Crore messages were 
sent (consumed) to the Farmers. With this total of 
54.17 Crore messages were sent (consumed) to 
the Farmers.
•	
The IVRS has been enhanced to deliver domain-
specific advisories in 13 languages according to 
the availability of domain experts at the KVKs.
•	
A new module to manage multimedia queries has 
been developed to address queries received from 
farmers through UMANG.
•	
A module has been created to minimize the manual 
entry of domain, subdomain, crop, problem, and 
problem types into the system.· 
Development and Enhancement:
Kisan Sarathi Apps:
•	
Kisan Sarathi Farmer App and Kisan Sarathi 
Experts App are developed and available on the 
UMANG platform.
•	
The standalone farmer app with features like 
Farmer Registration and Raising Query 2.0 is 
expected to be ready for testing by mid-January 
2025.
Three-Tier Call Flow System (L1, L2, L3):
•	
L1 (Kisan Call Center/ ATARI FTA)
•	
L2 (KVK Experts, Head, ATARI and Admin)
•	
L3 (ICAR Research Institutions)
•	
Development is in progress.
Agricultural Advisory Management System (AAMS):
•	
Creator and approver modules have been 
developed.
•	
Enhancements are ongoing, and the customizer 
module is under development.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
264
Integration with Kisan Sarathi :
•	
Integration 
with 
CSC 
(Common 
Service 
Centers): Completed integration.Pilot testing is 
currently underway.
•	
Integration with KCC (Kisan Call Center) has been 
initiated, and required APIs have been provided.
•	
Integration 
with 
IMD 
(India 
Meteorological 
Department) for weather data is in progress, with 
APIs provided by ICAR.
•	
Integration with e-NAM (National Agricultural 
Market) has started, but required APIs are still 
awaited. 
9.10.2.9 NCW 24x7 Women Helpline 
In order to facilitate the women victims and provide 
them psychological support, the National Commission of 
Women (NCW) has taken the initiative to start a helpline. 
DIC has been providing technical support to NCW for 
developing and hosting the helpline platform which is 
based on the IIDS platform of DIC. A dedicated helpline 
number 7827170170 has been provided for the purpose. 
This helpline is being operated from NCW premises which 
is located in New Delhi. During the period, 1,73,510 calls 
have been received or made through the NCW Helpline 
Platform, with this total call number have been reached 
to 4,38,189. 
During the period, security audit for the application has 
been completed, Support tickets resolution on priority 
and provided the technical support and maintenance to 
the application. 
 
9.10.2.10 NCW - Her Legal Guide App 
“NCW- Her Legal Guide” – A Mobile application focusing 
on various rights and statutes pertaining to women in 
India has been developed by DIC for National Women 
Commission. This Mobile App will act as a new friend 
for women in difficult situations and will make them 
aware of their rights. It also contains details about the 
helplines pertaining to women. Also, the App is available 
under UMANG. This app was officially launched on 9th 
November 2023 by Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud , chief Justice 
of India.The content is available in Hindi and english 
languages.
During the period tech support is provided to the app 
and server. Various helpline numbers are added in the 
application.
9.10.2.11 NCW Women Safety Audit Platform
National Commission for Women (NCW) intends to 
conduct Women’s safety audit in Indian cities to assess 
the level of safety experienced by women in public 
spaces and workspaces in the city based on a sample 
survey & focused group discussions (FGDs). DIC has 
developed a Mobile application for data collection and a 
Web Panel to manage the agencies and the survey with 
a dynamic dashboard and City Safety Scorecard for the 
audited city. The Mobile App for survey data collection 
contains a secure login for authenticated surveyors. 
The app works in both offline and online modes. Web 
Application contains different admin-level logins which 
control the mobile app. Survey module, Questionnaire 
module, Agency Module, Task Management module, 
Location management, Notification, Profile, Report and 
Dynamic dashboard and City Safety Scorecard for the 
audited city.
During the period City Safety Scorecard for the tire 
II, 12 cities have been calculated and published in 
software. Dashboard and analytics of the survey has 
been calculated.Detailed report and score card has been 
published by NCW . 11 other cities have been chosen 
for Phase 2 Survey. Survey completed for the 8 cities 
of phase 2. Scorecard has been generated for these 8 
cities by software.Project detailed report review is going 
on by NCW.

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
265
9.10.2.12 MY Bharat (Mera Yuva Bharat): Empowering 
India’s Youth
MY Bharat, an initiative by the Department of Youth 
Affairs under the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, 
Government of India, was launched on October 31, 
2023, by the Honourable Prime Minister. Digital India 
Corporation is the Knowledge Partner for its digital 
platform.
Since its inception, MY Bharat has made significant 
strides in connecting and empowering Indian Youth. 
By December 2024, MY Bharat achieved remarkable 
milestones in youth empowerment, with over 1.24 crore 
registrations and around 8.37 crore hits, reflecting its 
widespread impact and popularity.
The platform, designed for Indian youth aged 15 to 29, 
seeks to create a youth-centric Phygital ecosystem for 
Youth Development and Youth-led Development in 
rural, urban, and rurban India. It offers a wide range 
of opportunities and high-impact tools for youth to 
unleash their true potential and create a level playing 
field irrespective of their geographical, educational, 
or economic diversities. Primary offerings include 
Experiential 
Learning 
Opportunities, 
Volunteering 
Opportunities, Mega Events, CV Building Tools, and 
Public Profiles for youth. To enhance accessibility, MY 
Bharat portal is available in 15 regional languages, 
ensuring a user-friendly experience for a broader 
audience.
9.10.2.13 E-SARAS (https://www.esaras.in/ )
The Digital India Corporation has undertaken an 
initiative to develop an efficient and effective online 
platform aimed at enhancing the livelihoods of rural 
communities under the National Rural Livelihood 
Mission (NRLM), Ministry of Rural Development 
(MoRD), Government of India.
This platform serves as a showcase for products 
crafted by Self-Help Groups (SHGs) and associated 
organizations. Its primary objective is to curate and 
present authentic artisanal products from across the 
country.
Through this portal, customers gain access to 100% 
authentic, uniquely handcrafted products that reflect 
the rich cultural heritage and craftsmanship of rural India. 
These products, beautiful and extraordinary in design, 
come straight from the heart of India, connecting artisans 
to a wider audience and empowering them economically.
•	
Developed the eSaras Portal (www.esaras.in) 
and mobile application (available on Android and 
iOS) to showcase SHG products under the NRLM 
initiative by the Ministry of Rural Development 
(MoRD).
•	
Integrated Shiprocket as the logistics partner and 
Razorpay as the payment gateway for seamless 
operations on both the eSaras portal and mobile 
application.
•	
Successfully onboarded eSaras onto the ONDC 
network, boosting visibility and accessibility for 
SHG products across India.
•	
Designed and incorporated advanced features and 
functionalities customized for the ONDC buyer 
app, enhancing user experience and operational 
efficiency.
•	
Completed API integration for the Social Tag 
feature on the ONDC Network, enabling efficient 
product tracking and categorization.
•	
Configured shipping charges to ensure smooth and 
seamless order processing on the ONDC network.
•	
eSaras products are now visible on 8+ buyer 
(consumer) apps within the ONDC Network, 
significantly expanding product reach and market 
penetration.
•	
Development of the eSaras Multivendor Module is 
currently underway.
•	
Managed over 1,554 IVRS calls (inbound and 
outbound) to assist with registrations, inquiries, and 
grievance redressal, ensuring effective customer 
engagement and support.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
266
•	
Total number of 2,746+ products uploaded on 
eSaras, highlighting a diverse and extensive range 
of SHG offerings.
•	
Processed over 1,086 orders through the eSaras 
platform, demonstrating increasing consumer 
engagement and trust in the platform.
9.10.2.14 India Handmade
	 Indiahandmade: 
(www.indiahandmade.com)
Indiahandmade (https://www.indiahandmade.com/) is 
an e-commerce portal (designed & developed by Digital 
India Corporation) to strengthen artisans and weavers for 
promoting/selling their exquisite handloom and handicraft 
products to customers, by eliminating middlemen and 
ensuring fair remuneration. The portal was launched by 
the Ministry of Textiles on 22nd April 2023.
For sellers, all systems & processes are properly 
documented to make sure the sellers know what they 
need to do and how. Artisans and weavers are being 
supported by the Weavers Service Centres (WSCs) and 
Handicraft Service Centres (HSCs) at the ground level 
for awareness building, on-boarding, product uploading 
& order processing. A well-trained customer care team 
has also been deployed to take complaints/queries and 
resolve issues of the buyers and the sellers through Toll-
free number- 18001216216.
Indiahandmade has various handmade products on 
the portal. The products include handloom items like 
clothing, furnishings, toys and decorative items, as well 
as handicrafts like paintings & sculptures, furniture, home 
décor, art jewellery, accessories and more.
This platform facilitates the buyers for getting authentic 
handloom and handicrafts products directly from the 
Indian artisans and weavers. This innovative platform 
is revolutionizing the traditional handicraft industry by 
directly connecting handloom weavers and handicraft 
artisans with customers.
During the year, following activities were undertaken:
·	
Development, maintenance and Tech Support of 
online portal and mobile apps.
·	
More than 1900 sellers have been registered on 
the portal.
·	
More than 9000 products have been uploaded.
·	
More than 650 orders have been received on the 
portal.
·	
Various training sessions are being conducted 
for the orientation, setting up the user account, 
uploading 
products 
with 
different 
attributes, 
ordering process and reporting module, etc. 
·	
The portal is being promoted through social media, 
print media and various state level Melas.
·	
Indiahandmade ONDC integration live for Beta 
production.
9.10.2.15 NHAI DATALAKE 3.0
	 https://datalakeg.nhai.gov.in/nhai
The Memorandum of Understanding with NHAI was 
signed on 28 November 2023 for the development of 
NHAI Data Lake 3.0 to manage the extensive portfolio 
of NHAI projects. The estimated cost of the Project in 
the First Year of implementation is Rupees Thirty Crore 
and Eighty-Four Lakh(30.84) for twelve months. The 
financial are prepared based on the estimation for the 
development and deployment of the Proposed project for 
the First Party.
Achievements for the year are as follows:
•	
Meeting with NHAI - Requirement analysis and 
System DL 2.0 understanding
•	
Prototype design and documentation of various 
modules 

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
267
•	
Study of similar platforms and tools to be used for 
the development of Datalake applications.
•	
Comprehensive business requirement documents 
prepared to delineate project scope and objectives.
•	
The hiring of the core team for NHAI Datalake 3.0 
team.
•	
User Interviews are being conducted for key 
insights and improvements.
•	
Onboarding of the NHAI Manpower resources for 
NHAI Datalake 3.0 Team
•	
CMS has been finalised as SDA for the project 
through GeM.
•	
Provisioning of Cloud Infrastructure is in progress.
•	
WhatsApp has been Integrated with existing NHAI 
Datalake applications 
•	
Created comprehensive test cases for all 10 
modules, aligned with Figma designs and the 
Business Requirement Document (BRD)
•	
Development work is scheduled to start shortly.
•	
Developed and designed web screens for login and 
OTP-based registration, supporting contractual 
employees.
•	
Enabled agency registration through integrated 
SSO in Datalake for seamless experience in Web 
and Mobile.
•	
Uploaded the login and OTP implementation code 
to the server for deployment
•	
Integrated API for the login and OTP screen 
functionality on the web.
•	
Incorporated new role management capabilities 
and RBAC in datalake to enhance user access and 
functionality.
•	
Set up the database on the server to support 
backend operations.
•	
GIS will be integral to Datalake 3.0, with a 
comprehensive GIS database designed for NHAI. 
We are utilizing OpenLayers, GeoServer, PostGIS, 
and QGIS, while exploring proprietary platforms 
like Esri and MapmyIndia.
•	
The short-term development goal of completing 
the Login and Registration module AND Access 
Management System is expected to be achieved 
by the end of January.
•	
Phase 
2: 
DRD 
for 
Onboarding 
Contractor 
Managment and DPR Deliverables completed 
Land Acquisition Cost (LAC) process currentity 
underway.
9.10.2.16 MANAS- National Narcotics Helpline 
Development 
and 
Implementation 
of 
National 
Narcotics Helpline for NCB.
The project has been taken up in partnership with the 
Narcotics Control Bureau, Ministry of Home Affairs. 
MANAS - National Narcotics Helpline, was launched 
by the Hon’ble Union Home and Cooperation Minister, 
Shri Amit Shah, on 18th July 2024 at Vigyan Bhawan, 
New Delhi. MANAS is a 24/7 platform with four modes of 
communication: a toll-free number (1933), a web portal 
(www.ncbmanas.gov.in), email (info.ncbmanas@gov.
in), and the UMANG mobile app. This platform enables 
citizens to connect with the Narcotics Control Bureau 
(NCB) anonymously, around the clock, to report and 
seek help for drug-related issues. 
The objective is to implement, operate and manage the 
MANAS helpline services. The MANAS setup intends 
to enable the Drug Addicts / Informer / Citizen to 
communicate their issues or complaints related to drugs 
through MANAS service for taking up their matter with 
respective stakeholders. The objective of the helpline 
centre are to strengthen the measures for safeties / 
awareness etc. of Drug Addicts/ Informer / Citizen / other 
concerned as follows:
i.	
Round-the-Clock Toll-Free Assistance: To 
provide toll-free 24x7 telecom service to Drug 
Addicts/ Informer/ Citizen seeking support and 
information.
ii.	
Non-Crisis Intervention: To facilitate non-crisis 
intervention through referral to the appropriate 
agencies and other concerned departments/
services. 
iii.	
Awareness 
and 
Accessibility: 
To 
provide 
information about the appropriate support services, 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
268
government schemes and programmes available 
to the Drug Addicts/ Informer/ Citizen affected by 
drugs, in particular situations within the local area 
in which he/she resides or is employed.
iv.	
Integrated Assistance: To provide integrated 
support and assistance to Drug Addicts/ Informer/ 
Citizen affected by Drugs or drug users, both in 
private and public places under one roof through 
the concerned Helpline Centre.
v.	
Integrated Multi-Sectoral Support Framework: 
To facilitate non- emergency access to a range 
of Information services including medical, legal, 
psychological, 
rehabilitation 
and 
counselling 
support under one roof.
Four Communication Channels for the MANAS Helpline: 
Web Portal
IVRS
Email
UMANG 
Application
The MANAS Helpline operates from the Narcotics 
Control Bureau (NCB) headquarters in New Delhi. It 
is currently integrated with 30 zones across India and 
is set to expand in the next phase by connecting with 
36 Anti-Narcotics Task Forces (ANTFs). During the 
reporting period, the platform successfully generated a 
total of 175,897 tickets, reflecting its significant reach 
and effectiveness in addressing drug-related concerns 
nationwide. 
 
Hon’ble Union Home Minister and Minister of 
Cooperation, Shri Amit Shah, officially launched the 
MANAS Helpline Portal during the 7th Apex Level Meeting 
of NCORD, held at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi, on 18th 
July 2024.
Performance Metrics from Launch (18th July 2024) to 
December 2024:
 
1.	
Academic Bank of Credits (ABC)
 
•	
Academic Bank of Credits (ABC) was 
launched on July 29, 2021, by the Prime 
Minister
 
•	
Alignment with the NEP-2020, conceived as 
a national-level facility.
 
•	
ABC has been envisaged to facilitate the 
academic mobility of students with the free-
dom to study across the country with an ap-

Attached Offices and Societies
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
269
propriate “credit transfer” mechanism from 
one programme to another, leading to attain 
a Degree/ Diploma/PG-diploma, etc.,
 
•	
The APAAR ID (Automated Permanent Aca-
demic Account Registry) is a unique identi-
fier in this system which acts as a central pil-
lar for tracking students’ academic and skill 
achievements throughout their educational 
journey.
APAAR ID Announced as part of the ‘One Nation, 
One Student ID’ initiative coined by Union Minister 
Shri Dharmendra Pradhan.
 Total APAAR 
ID created
Verified 
APAAR ID
Institution 
Registered
Educational 
Records 
Mapped
31.52 Cr
15.42 Cr
2318
3.05 Cr
Features
• 
Enables multiple entries & exits in the academic 
lifecycle of students
• 
Only verified academic institutions can upload 
credits records
• 
Fully in online mode
• 
To enable students to select the best courses or 
combination of courses to suit their aptitude and 
quest for knowledge.
• 
To allow students to tailor their degrees or make 
specific modifications or specialisations rather than 
undergoing the rigid, regularly prescribed degree 
or courses of a single university or autonomous 
college.
• 
Courses undergone by the students through the 
online modes through National Schemes like 
SWAYAM, NPTEL, V-Lab etc. or of any specified 
university, shall also be mapped under ABC for 
credit accumulation.
Institutional Engagement:
As of January 2025, ABC boasts a robust network 
with 2,318 registered institutions, comprising Central 
Universities, 
State 
Universities, 
Deemed 
to 
be 
Universities, Private Universities, Institutions of National 
Importance, Autonomous Colleges, School boards, 
Technical Boards and various other educational bodies. 
This collaborative effort has resulted in the validated 
APAAR IDs of 15.42 Crore unique learner. The details 
are as follows:
Category
Total 
Awarding 
Institutions 
(Approx.)
Institu-
tions En-
rolled on 
ABC
Students/
Learners 
APAAR IDs 
created
Central 
University
57
53
45,46,406
Deemed 
University
132
124
11,55,507
Private 
University
490
471
23,44,825
State 
University
489
448
2,71,18,678
Autonomous 
College
1,083
736
20,42,482
Institutions 
of National 
Importance  
(IIT, IIM, NIT, 
IIIT,etc.)
158
135
2,97,299
Skill Institute
64
50
1,32,98,963
Other 
Institutions 
(Standalone, 
Councils, 
Technical & 
Examination 
Boards, etc.)
532
301
33,39,782
School 
Education 
(UDISE+)
 
 
9,64,11,521
Grand Total
3,005
2,318 15,05,55,463
Key Highlights:
• 
A total of 31 Crore APAAR IDs have been created, 
with 15.42 Crore validated. These include 9.64 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Attached Offices and Societies
Annual
2024-2025
270
Crore IDs for school education, 4.56 Crore for 
higher education (which is 120% increment from 
the last year), and 1.32 Crore for skill education.
• 
In just two months (Nov-Dec 2024), 8 Crore APAAR 
IDs were validated in school.
• 
3 Crore credit records have been successfully 
seeded with APAAR IDs this year.
• 
Real-time API and ERP integrations enable efficient 
processes for result declaration, eKYC, and credit 
mapping.
• 
Seamless integration with national platforms like 
DigiLocker, E-Samarth ERP, NTA, Skill India 
Digital, and others has enhanced transparency 
and efficiency.
• 
Over 300 workshops have been organized 
in collaboration with state higher education 
departments to further promote these initiatives.
• 
Gujarat leads in credit record mapping with 35.56 
L records, followed by Maharashtra (30.02 L) and 
Karnataka (24.39 L).
• 
14,000 Files are uploaded and 23 lacs records 
proceed on a single day (achievement)
• 
APAAR IDs can now be created using Driving 
Licenses and PAN cards. The creation process is 
available through multiple convenient channels: 
DigiLocker, Umang, the ABC portal directly by 
the student, Common Service Centres (CSC) 
with assistance, and via API/Bulk module through 
academic institutions. For minor students, APAAR 
IDs can be generated with parental consent 
through school administrations.
• 
Support services include a ticketing system, video 
conferencing for institutions, and a dedicated call 
canter (1800-889-3511) for student inquiries, along 
with updated knowledge and resource pages.
Way Forward:
• 
Strengthening 
two-way 
integration 
with 
key 
schemes and platforms such as NSP, NTA, and 
Samarth to ensure seamless data exchange and 
process optimization.
• 
APAAR ID generation for foreign students
• 
Developed credit transfer guideline and module
• 
Enhancing the ABC student account dashboard 
to align with National Credit Framework (NCrF) 
standards, 
ensuring 
comprehensive 
and 
standardized record-keeping.
• 
Expanding the use of APAAR ID for eKYC in 
critical processes, including admissions, entrance 
tests, counselling, examinations, and scholarship 
applications.
• 
Facilitating document verification through APAAR 
ID for recruitment, employment, apprenticeships, 
and 
admissions 
to 
streamline 
verification 
processes.
• 
Conducting awareness workshops at both state 
and institutional levels to promote the adoption and 
understanding of ABC and APAAR initiatives.
• 
Establishing ABC as a one of a parameter in 
accreditation evaluations
• 
Develop advanced data analytics tools to provide 
institutions and policymakers with actionable 
insights into academic trends, credit utilization, and 
student progress.
• 
Link APAAR IDs with skill certifications from 
recognized organizations to bridge the gap 
between formal education and vocational training.

CHAPTER
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
271
10.1	 Use of Official Language Hindi in Official Work
In order to promote the use of Hindi in official work in 
the Ministry, Kanthastha tool developed by Department 
of Official Language has been integrated with e-Office.
In order to ensure implementation of Official Language 
Policy in the offices under the administrative control of 
this Ministry, Official Language Inspection was conducted 
by Official Language Committee in NIC, Dehradun; STPI, 
Dehradun; NIELIT, Shimla; ETDC, Hyderabad; ETDC, 
Bengaluru; NIC, Gandhinagar; STPI, Visakhapatnam; 
NIC, Hyderabad; STPI, Lucknow; NIELIT, Lucknow; 
NIC, Kolkata; NIELIT, Kolkata; NIELIT, Gorakhpur; NIC, 
Jaipur; C-DAC, Pune; NIC, Lucknow; ETDC, Solan; 
NIC, Patna; NIELIT, Patna; Semiconductor Lab, Mohali. 
Besides, Official Language Inspection was conducted 
at Ministerial level in C-DAC, Mumbai; C-DAC, Mohali; 
NIELIT, Gorakhpur.
During 
the 
reporting 
period, 
various 
important 
documents such as Annual Report, Outcome Budget, 
various Cabinet Notes and Tables for Parliamentary 
Standing Committee, answers to Parliament Questions 
and Questionnaire on Demands for Grants, Power 
Point Presentation for Standing Committee, Follow-up 
Action Report, Monthly Report to the Cabinet, and other 
miscellaneous documents were translated from English 
into Hindi.
10.2	 RTI Matters
There is an RTI Cell in the Ministry, which is the 
central receiving point for RTI applications/appeals and 
responsible for overall coordination in respect of RTI 
matters of MeitY and its organisations. MeitY and its 
Attached/Subordinate Offices/Societies are separate 
Public Authorities in terms of Section 2 (h) of RTI Act, 
2005. Each of these Public Authorities has its own Central 
Public Information Officers (CPIOs)/First Appellate 
Authorities (FAAs). For any information relating to these 
organisations, applications need to be submitted to the 
concerned Public Authorities as per provisions of RTI 
Act, 2005. All Public Authorities also host relevant inputs/
documents on their respective websites, as required 
under Section 4 of the RTI Act. The relevant contents 
are reviewed and updated periodically by the concerned 
Public Authorities.
During the period from 01.01.2024 to 31.12.2024, 2931 
RTI applications and 140 RTI Appeals were received 
in this Ministry. The main subject of the applications 
received in MeitY and its organisations are IT Act, Social 
Media, DPDP Act, e-Governance services, online gaming 
and PLI Scheme.
10.3	 Public Grievances
Public Grievances Cell in MeitY is headed by Nodal 
Grievance Officer.
The grievances received in PG Cell through CPGRAM 
portal and also offline mode were mainly relate to the 
following:
a)	
CSC
b)	
Digital India/e-Services 
c)	
Social Media
d)	
Cyber Security
e)	
NIC
f)	
My Gov
g)	
DPDP Act
During the period from 01.01.2024 to 31.12.2024, 9273 
grievances were received and out of these, 9022 were 
disposed of. Detailed information for the period is shown 
below:
Other Matters
10

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Other Matters
Annual
2024-2025
272
Grievance Source
Brought 
Forwarded
Receipt During 
Period
Total Receipt
Case Disposed 
During Period
Closing 
Balance
DARPG
15
126
141
138
03
Direct from complainant
304
6720
7024
6823
201
President Secretariat 
11
333
344
336
08
Pension
05
33
38
37
01
PMO
181
1545
1726
1688
38
Total
516
8757
9273
9022
251
and accountability. It is useful way of defining for the 
customers the nature of service provision and explicit 
standards of service delivery. Details on Citizens’ Charter 
are available on MeitY’s website, url: h t t p s : / / w w w .
m e i t y . g o v . i n / c l i e n t s - c i t i z e n s - c h a r t e r
10.5	 Information & Documentation Centre (Library)
This Ministry has a spacious well-planned Library viz 
Information and Documentation Centre (I&DC), with 
an inventory of books, journals, magazines, annual 
reports and newspapers. It uses RFID based Library 
Management System to manage acquisition, cataloguing 
and circulation, of books/journals/magazines. I&DC also 
provides various other services like Inter-Library loan 
facility to the officials of the Ministry through DELNET 
(Developing Library Network) and arranges books/
journals/magazines/articles from libraries of various 
other organizations. Services are also provided to the 
retired officials of the Ministry and trainees who undertake 
projects in the Ministry.
The Information & Documentation Centre possesses 
approximately 20,872/- books on various subject including 
Electronics, Computer, IT, Computer Languages, Fiction, 
Artificial Intelligence & Cyber Security. I&DC has books 
on Hindi and English literature also. I&DC procures on an 
average 125 books and approximately 34 Journals (Print) 
per annum and E-books services (Book 24x7) is also 
made available to the authorized users.
The Ministry is spearheading an Intra-Ministerial 
initiative viz the Library Consortium, Ministry of Electronics 
& Information Technology (MCIT). Consortium of the 
Ministry (MCIT Consortium) comprises the users from 
Pie Chart showing the details of grievances received 
during the period 01.01.2024 to 31.12.2024.
During the period 01.01.2024 to 31.12.2024, 1410 
Grievance Appeals were also received and out of these, 
1296 were disposed of.
10.4	 Citizens’ Charter
The basic objectives of Citizens’ Charter are to empower 
the citizen in relation to public service delivery. It 
represents the commitment of the organization towards 
the standard, quality and time frame of service delivery, 
grievance 
redress 
mechanism, 
transparency 
and 
accountability. The Citizens’ Charter is written, voluntary 
declaration by service providers about service standards, 
choice, accessibility, non-discrimination, transparency 

Other Matters
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
273
the National Informatics Centre (NIC), C-DAC, NIELIT, 
SAMEER, C-MET, STQC Directorate, STPI, ERNET 
India, C-DOT. The Ministry provides on-line access to 
various e- resources i.e. IEEE Journals/Transactions/
Proceedings, IEE Journals/Proceedings, ACM Digital 
Library and ISO Standards to its users through MCIT 
Libraiy Consortium.
I&DC provides Gartner Research and Advisory Services 
which is useful e- resource consists of reliable global trends 
& best practices• and latest reports on digital technologies.
I&DC also provides “Bloomberg Terminal Services”. 
The Bloomberg Terminal service is a global, 24-hour 
a day, financial information network providing real-
time and historical pricing, indicative and fundametal 
data, and customized analytics. Other features include 
on-demand print and multimedia news and research, 
extensive electronic-trading capabilities, and a superior 
communications platform.
10.6	 Parliament Section
1. 	
In Calendar Year 2024 the Budget Session, the 
Special Session, Budget cum Monsoon Session 
and Winter session were held. During these 
Sessions 124 number of Parliament Questions in 
Lok Sabha (8 Starred & 116 Unstarred) and 120 
number of Parliament Questions in Rajya Sabha 
(8 Starred & 112 Unstarred) were admitted and 
handled by the Parliament Section. These were 
mainly related to Development of IT Hub, Financial 
Cyber Crime, Control of Cert-In, Development 
of Additive Manufacturing (3D Printing ) in India, 
National 
Knowledge 
Network(NKN), 
Global 
Outage, Incentive for Semiconductor and display 
ecosystem, Digital India Bill, Uniform Fiscal Support, 
Robotic Process Automation Lab, Grievance 
Redressal 
By 
Social 
Media 
Intermediaries, 
Visveswaraya Ph.D. Scheme, Development of 
Metaverse, Big Tech companies, Digital Public 
Infrastructure and AI, Electronic Manufacturing 
Companies, Research and Development, Online 
Gamers, Cyber Security Incidents, Progress of 
Digital India Programme, Future Skills Prime 
Programme, Digital copyright infringement by online 
chatbots, Leakage of personal data on Dark Web, 
Manufacturing of Mobile Phone, Implementation of 
Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023, TIDE 
2.0 scheme, Electricity supply to data centres, Tariff 
rationalisation  for  smart  phone  manufacturing, 
Action against Data Breaches, Semiconductor 
Industry, Technological expertise for blockchain 
effectiveness 
for 
MSMEs, 
Digital 
Personal 
Data 
Protection 
Act 
(DPDPA), 
Legislation/
Rules for Online Gaming and Online Gambling, 
Adoption 
and 
Development 
of 
Artificial  
Intelligence  under  PPP  Model, Amendment 
in IT Act to regulate AI, Support to Tech-
Startup, Semiconductor  chip  fabrication, Digital 
Literacy 
and 
Skill 
Development, 
Greenfield 
Semiconductor Fab, Personal Data Mining and 
Phishing, Deepfake, Digital Public Infrastructure, 
Scheme  for  scaling  up  electronics  production, 
Identified digital villages in Andhra Pradesh, Digi 
Locker, National Cyber Security Policy, Software 
Technology Park, Business Process Outsourcing 
Industry, Generative Artificial Intelligence, High 
Purity Silicon.
2.	
Department 
related 
Parliamentary 
Standing 
Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology has discussed on the following 
subjects:- 
	
i.	
Demands for Grants (2024-25);
 
ii. 
Impact of emergence of Artificial Intelligence 
and related issues.
3. 	
The Parliamentary Committee on Information and 
Communication Technology Management (ICTM), 
Rajya Sabha has taken meeting on the subject 
“Exploring the Use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
in Parliamentary Processes” in New Parliament 
Building.
4. 	
The 
Parliamentary 
Standing 
Committee 
on 
Communications and Information Technology 
has selected the following subjects for discussion 
during the year 2024-25:
 
i. 
Impact of emergence of Artificial Intelligence 
and related issues
	
ii.	
Social and digital platforms and their regula-
tion

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Other Matters
Annual
2024-2025
274
	
iii.	
Impact of Information Technology Agree-
ment in the new Age
5.	
The following Annual Reports of Societies and 
Notifications of the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology have been laid on the 
Table of the Both Houses (Lok Sabha and Rajya 
Sabha) of the Parliament: 
SI. 
No.
MeitY and its Organisations/ Attached Offices
F.Y.
Laid in Lok Sabha
Laid in 
Rajya Sabha
1.
C-MET (Annual Report)
2022-23
20/12/2023
09/02/2024
2.
C-DAC (Annual Report)
2022-23
20/12/2023
09/02/2024
3.
STPI (Annual Report)
2022-23
20/12/2023
09/02/2024
4.
ERNET India (Annual Report)
2022-23
20/12/2023
09/02/2024
5.
SAMEER (Annual Report)
2022-23
20/12/2023
09/02/2024
6.
UIDAI (Annual Report)
2022-23
07/02/2024
09/02/2024
7.
Statement- 45th Report of the Standing Committee on C&IT 
on Demand for Grants (2023-24) of MeitY
-
20/12/2023
02/02/2024
8.
UIDAI Notification:-
• Unique Identification Authority of India (Appointment 
of Officers and Employees) Amendment Regulations, 
2023;
• The Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Amendment 
Regulations, 2023;
• The Aadhaar (Payment of Fees for Performance of 
Authentication) Regulations, 2023;
• The Aadhaar (Authentication and Offline Verification) 
Amendment Regulations, 2023.
20/12/2023
09/02/2024
9.
Detailed Demand for Grants (DDG) and Output-Outcome 
Monitoring Framework (OOMF) for the year 2024-25
-
31.07.2024
-
10.
UIDAI Notification:-
i. 
The Aadhar (Enrolment and Update) Amendment 
regulation, 2024
ii. 
The UIDAI ( Appointment of Officers and Employees) 
Amendment Regulations, 2024
iii. The 
Aadhar 
(Enrolment 
and 
Update) 
Second 
Amendment regulation, 2024
iv. The Aadhar (Sharing of Information) Amendment 
regulation, 2024
v. The Aadhaar (Payment of Fees for Performance of 
Authentication) Amendment Regulations, 2024
vi. The Aadhaar (Authentication and Offline Verification) 
Amendment Regulations, 2024
vii. The Aadhaar (Payment of Fees for Performance of 
Authentication) Amendment Regulations, 2024
-
31.07.2024
02.08.2024

Other Matters
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
275
SI. 
No.
MeitY and its Organisations/ Attached Offices
F.Y.
Laid in Lok Sabha
Laid in 
Rajya Sabha
11.
UIDAI Notification:- UIDAI (Appointment of Officers and 
Employees) Second Amendment Regulations, 2024, under 
Section 55 of the Aadhar (Targeted Delivery of Financial 
and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016
-
04.12.2024
06.12.2024
12.
SCL (Annual Report)
2023-24
11.12.2024
13.12.2024
13.
NIELIT (Annual Report)
2023-24
11.12.2024
13.12.2024
14.
BISAG-N (Annual Report)
2023-24
11.12.2024
13.12.2024
15.
STPI (Annual Report)
2023-24
To be laid during 
Budget Session 2025
20.12.2024
16.
DIC (Annual Report)
2023-24
To be laid during 
Budget Session 2025
20.12.2024
17.
UIDAI Notification:- Aadhar (Authentication and Offline 
Verification) Second Amendment Regulations, 2024, under 
Section 55 of the Aadhar (Targeted Delivery of Financial 
and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016
-
To be laid during 
Budget Session 2025
20.12.2024
10.7	 Vigilance Unit
Vigilance Unit, Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (MeitY) is the Nodal Unit for addressing all 
vigilance matters concerning MeitY and its Organizations 
under the administrative control of the Ministry. The 
Vigilance Unit is headed by Joint Secretary, who has 
also been appointed as Chief Vigilance Officer (CVO) by 
Central Vigilance Commission (CVC). The CVO with the 
assistance and support of a team of officials looks into 
the vigilance matters of MeitY and its organizations and 
is the Nodal Officer for MeitY for interaction with CVC 
and CBI. Each of the Autonomous Societies under MeitY 
are provided with an independent CVO appointed by 
Secretary, MeitY based on the CVO’s recommendation 
in consultation with CVC. The organizations under 
MeitY have their own vigilance setup in their respective 
organizations, who work in close coordination with the 
Vigilance Unit of the Ministry to ensure effective vigilance 
administration. 
During the year 2024, a total of 84 complaints were 
received in Vigilance Unit, MeitY which included 
complaints from Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) 
and others received through various platforms, including 
Prime Minister’s Office, Public Grievance Portal etc. 
These complaints primarily involved allegations on 
favoritism, corruption in recruitment and promotion, 
violation of CVC guidelines/GFRs and GeM’s terms and 
conditions in tendering process/ hiring of manpower, 
misuse of official position, harassment, unfair transfer/
posting etc. 
During the year 11 major cases were examined/
investigated in Vigilance Unit and after taking due 
action necessary advice was provided to the concerned 
authorities for bringing in Systemic Improvement in their 
functioning. Wherever necessary advisories were issued 
and in some cases disciplinary action was initiated 
against the erring officials. In the disposal of disciplinary 
cases, whenever necessary, advice of UPSC is obtained 
before imposing penalty as per CCS(CCA) Rules, 1965. 
In order to mitigate potential risk of corruption, Vigilance 
Unit, MeitY conducts regular scrutiny Annual Property 
Returns of the officers/officials of MeitY. The review 
aims to identify possession of assets disproportionate to 
known sources of income, non-intimation of transaction of 
property etc. During the year 2024 more than 234 Annual 
Property Returns (APRs) were scrutinized. Necessary 
directions based on the observations noticed in scrutiny 
of APRs were conveyed to the concerned authorities 
with a view to strengthen the vigilance mechanism of this 
Ministry.
In terms of the advice of the Central Vigilance Commission, 
MeitY organized a three-months campaign on various 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Other Matters
Annual
2024-2025
276
Preventive Vigilance activities as a prelude to Vigilance 
Awareness Week (VAW) 2024 from 16th August 2024 
to 15th November 2024. The campaign focused on 
building awareness about Public Interest Disclosure 
and Protection of Informers (PIDPI) Resolution, and 
included training programs on various topics such as 
Ethics and Governance, Conduct Rules, Systems and 
Procedure of Organization, Cyber Hygiene and Security, 
Procurement etc. The trainings were well attended by 
the officials of MeitY. As per the directions of Central 
Vigilance Commission, Vigilance Unit, MeitY observed 
the Vigilance Awareness Week, 2024 from 28th October 
to 3rd November 2024. The week commenced with 
administering of integrity pledge within the premises of 
Electronics Niketan, MeitY by Additional Secretary, MeitY 
on 28th October, 2024. During the VAW-2024, officers 
of Vigilance Unit visited NIC- Lucknow, C-DAC Chennai, 
C-DAC Thiruvananthapuram, STPI-Bhubneshwar, STPI-
Lucknow, C-MET Thrissur for sensitizing the officials on 
vigilance aspects. 
Random inspections of records were carried out by 
Vigilance Unit and necessary Systemic Improvement 
Measures were communicated wherever shortcomings 
were identified to strengthen administrative efficiency. 
Additionally, surprise inspections were carried out with a 
view to bring in efficiency and accountability. 
Periodical reports and returns were timely sent to the 
concerned authorities and preventive measures were 
communicated to the organizations under MeitY to enable 
them to bring in robust mechanism to curb corruption and 
unethical practices in public administration and to bring 
about transparency, fair-play, objectivity, accountability 
and responsiveness to the aspirations of the citizens. 
Efforts were made by Vigilance Unit to conduct periodic 
rotation of staff and ensure 100% e-payment and 
procurement made through GeM. Wherever deviation 
from Govt. procedures were observed, necessary 
advisories were issued to the concerned authorities.

Annexure
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
277
Annexure - I
Approval of Union Cabinet for extension of the Digital India Programme for the duration of 15th Finance 
Commission
The Government had launched the DIP in July 2015 with three key vision areas, namely digital infrastructure as a core 
utility to every citizen, governance and services on demand, and digital empowerment of citizens. The overall goal is to 
ensure that digital technologies improve the life of every citizen, expand India’s digital economy, and create investment 
and employment opportunities. It has also helped in the delivery of services directly to beneficiaries in a transparent 
manner. In the process, India has emerged as one of the pre-eminent nations of the world to use technology to 
transform the lives of its citizens.
The Government, in August 2023, approved the extension of the DIP with a total outlay of Rs 14,903.25 Crore for the 
period of 15th Finance Commission i.e., 2021-22 to 2025-26.
The extension of the programme will have the following major benefits:
o	
6.25 Lakh IT professionals will be re-skilled and up-skilled under the FutureSkills PRIME Programme.
o	
2.65 Lakh persons will be trained in information security under the Information Security & Education Awareness 
Phase (ISEA) Programme. In addition, more than 12 Crore beneficiaries are envisaged to be covered under the 
Cyber Aware Digital Naagrik component through various activities.
o	
540 additional services will be available under the UMANG app/ platform. At present over 1,700 services are 
already available on UMANG.
o	
9 more supercomputers will be added under the National Super Computer Mission. This is in addition to 18 
supercomputers already deployed.
o	
Bhashini, the AI-enabled multi-language translation tool (currently available in 10 languages) will be rolled out in 
all 22 scheduled 8 languages.
o	
Modernisation of the NKN which connects 1,787 educational institutions.
o 
Digital document verification facility under DigiLocker will now be available to MSMEs and other Corporates.
o	
1,200 startups will be supported in Tier 2/3 cities.
o	
New initiatives in the area of cyber security including the development of tools and integration of more than 200 
sites with the National Cyber Coordination Centre.

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annexure
Annual
2024-2025
278
Annexure - II
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
ANNUAL BUDGET 2025-26
Sl. 
No.
Scheme/Non-Schemes
Budgetary Support 
(Rupees in crore)
Non-Schemes
1
MeitY Secretariat
210.25
2
National Informatics Centre
1600.00
3
Regulatory Authorities
445.00
3.1
Standardisation Testing and Quality Certification (STQC)
170.00
3.2
Cyber Security (CERT-In)
255.00
3.3
Controller of Certifying Authorities (CCA)
15.00
3.4
Data Protection Board
5.00
4
Assistance to Autonomous & Other Bodies
1700.00
4.1
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC)
275.00
4.2
Society for Applied Microwave Electronics Engineering and Research (SAMEER)
160.00
4.3
Centre for Materials for Electronics Technology (C-MET)
100.00
4.4
Bhaskaracharya National Institute for Space Applications and Geo-Information 
[BISAG(N)]
50.00
4.5
Semi Conductor Laboratory (SCL)
500.00
4.6
Digital India Corporation (DIC)
15.00
4.7
Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI)
600.00
Sub-Total (Non-Scheme)
3955.25
Schemes
5
Digital India Programme (Umbrella Programme)
6071.00
5.1
Capacity Building & Skill Development Scheme
575.00
5.2
Electronic Governance (incl. EAP)
617.00
5.3
National Knowledge Network
0.25
5.4
Promotion of Electronics & IT Hardware Mfg (MSIPS, EDF & Manufacturing 
Clusters)
712.00
5.5
Promotion of IT/ITeS Industries
130.00

Annexure
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
279
Sl. 
No.
Scheme/Non-Schemes
Budgetary Support 
(Rupees in crore)
5.6
R&D in IT/Electronics/ CCBT
1249.75
5.7
Cyber Security Projects (NCCC & Others)
782.00
5.8
Promotion of Digital Transactions (excluding Digital Payments)
5.00
5.9
IndiaAI Mission
2000.00
6
Other Schemes
16000.00
6.1
Production Linked Incentive Scheme
9000.00
6.1.1
Production Linked Incentive for Large Scale Electronics Manufacturing
8885.00
6.1.2
Production Linked Incentive for IT Hardware
115.00
6.2
Modified Programme for Development of Semiconductor and Display Ecosystem in 
India
7000.00
6.2.1
Modified Scheme for setting up of Compound Semiconductors/Silicon Photonics/
Sensors Fab/Discrete Semiconductors Fab and Semiconductor Assembly, Testing, 
Marking and Packaging (ATMP)/Outsourced Semiconductor Assembly and Test 
(OSAT) facilities in India
3900.00
6.2.2
Modified Scheme for Setting up of Semiconductor Fabs in India
2499.96
6.2.3
Modified Scheme for setting up of Display Fabs in India
0.04
6.2.4
Modernisation of Semi-Conductor Laboratory, Mohali
400.00
6.2.5
Design Linked Incentive Scheme
200.00
Sub-Total (Scheme)
22071.00
Total (Scheme & Non-Scheme)
26026.25

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annexure
Annual
2024-2025
280
Annexure - III
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology Employees structure as on 01.01.2025
Group
Permanent/ 
Temporary
Total 
No. of 
Employees
SC
% of 
SC total 
employees
ST
% of ST 
total emp- 
loyees
Persons 
with 
disabilities
% of 
PWDs
Group ‘A’
Permanent
(i)	 Other than lowest 
rung of Group A
183
24
13.11
13
07.10
05
02.73
(ii)	 Lowest rung of 
Group A
10
00
00
00
00.00
00
00
Temporary
(i)	 Other than lowest 
rung of Group A
04
00
00
00
00
00
00
(ii)	 Lowest rung of 
Group A
03
00
00
01
3.33
00
00
Group ‘B’ 
(Gazetted)
Permanent Temporary
60
16
26.67
03
05.00
02
03.33
Temporary
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
Group ‘B’ 
(Non -
Gazetted)
Permanent
67
13
19.40
05
07.46
03
04.48
Temporary
20
03
15.00
01
05.00
01
05.00
Group ‘C’
Permanent
128
24
18.75
06
04.69
03
02.34
Temporary
58
04
06.90
04
06.90
03
05.17
Total
533
84
15.76
33
06.19
17
03.19

Annexure
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
281
Annexure - IV
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
List of Abbreviations
AEBAS
Aadhaar Enabled Biometric Attendance System 
AEPS
Aadhaar Enabled Payment System
AI
Artificial Intelligence
AKAM
Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav
API
Application Programming Interface
ASIC
Application Specific Integrated Circuit
ASP
Application Service Provider
ASR
Automatic Speech Recognition
BHIM
Bharat Interface for Money
BISAG-N
Bhaskaracharya National Institute for Space Applications and Geo - informatics 
BOSS
Bharat Operating System Solutions
BRAP
Business Reform Action Plans
BSNL
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited
CCTNS
Crime and Criminal Tracking Network & Systems 
C-DAC
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
CEDA
Centre of Excellence for Data Analytics
CERT-In
Indian Computer Emergency Response Team 
CFC
Common Facility Centre
CGIT
Central Government Industrial Tribunal
CIPET
Central Institute of Plastics Engineering & Technology 
C-MET
Centre for Materials for Electronics Technology
CMTI
Central Manufacturing Technology Institute 
COSEM
Companion Specification for Energy Metering
CPGRAMS
Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
CSC
Common Services Centre
CSSS
Champion Service Sector Scheme
CTDP
Comprehensive Telecom Development Plan 
C2SD
Chip to System Design
DAPSC
Development Action Plan for Scheduled Castes 
DBT
Direct Benefit Transfer
DEPwD
Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities 
DGHR
Directorate General of Human Resource Development 
DIC
Digital India Corporation
DIHAR
Defence Institute of High-Altitude Research 

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annexure
Annual
2024-2025
282
DIP
Digital India Program
DILRMP
Digital India Land Records Modernization Programme 
DLC
Digital Life Certificate
DLMS
Device Language Message Specification
DPIIT
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
DSC
Digital Signature Certificate
EGDI
eGovernment Development Index
EMC
Electronics Manufacturing Clusters
EoDB
Ease of Doing Business
EoL
Ease of Living
ERNET
Education and Research Network 
ESP
eSign Service Provider 
eTaal
Electronic Transaction Aggregation and Analysis Layer 
FINTECH
Financial Technologies
FOSS
Free and Open Source Software
FSOC
Free Space Optical Connectivity
GeM
Government e-Marketplace
GSTN
Goods and Services Tax Network
HRD
Human Resource Development
IBM
Indian Bureau of Mines
iCAS
Indian Conditional Access System
ICJS
Interoperable Criminal Justice System
ICT
Information and Communication Technology
I&DC
Information and Documentation Centre (i.e. Library) 
IIFPT
Indian Institute of Food Processing Technology
IIDS
Implementation of Interactive Information Dissemination System 
IIT
Indian Institute of Technology
INCEP
Integrated Citizen Engagement Platform 
IndEA
India Enterprise Architecture
InDEA
India Digital Ecosystem Architecture 
IoT
Internet of Things
ISEA
Information Security & Education Awareness
IVFRT
Immigration, Visa, and Foreigners Registration & Tracking 
JAM
JanDhan, Aadhaar and Mobile
KMS
Knowledge Management System, Key Management System 
LMS
Learning Management System
MAQAN
Metro Area Quantum Access Network
MDoNER
Ministry of Development for North-Eastern Region 

Annexure
REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annual
2024-2025
283
MeitY
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology
MMIC
 Monolithic Microwave Integrated Circuit
MNRE
 Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
MSME
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
MTS
Mining Tenement System
MSDE
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship
M-SIPS
Modified Special Incentive Package Scheme 
NaMPET
National Mission on Power Electronics Technology 
NAPS
National Portal for Rooftop Solar
NCMEC
National Centre for Missing and Exploited Children
NCRP
National Cybercrime Reporting Portal
NDUW
National Database of Unrecognised Workers
NEBPS
North-East BPO Promotion Scheme
NCoG
National Centre of Geo-informatics 
NCCC
National Cyber Coordination Centre 
NCPP
National Cyberpolice Portal
NCSC
National Career Service Centres
NeGD
National e-Governance Division
NDC
NER -National Data Centre in North -East Region 
NDEAR
National Digital Education Architecture
NER
North- Eastern Region
NERS
Nationwide Emergency Response System 
NeVA
National eVidhan Application 
NavIC
Navigation with Indian Constellation
NFVI
Network Function Virtualization Infrastructure 
NGDRS
National Generic Document Registration System 
NIC
National Informatics Centre
NICSI
National Informatics Centre Services Inc.
NIDHI
National Integrated Database of Hospitality Industry 
NIELIT
National Institute of Electronics & Information Technology 
NJGD
National Judicial Data Grid
NLCPR
Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources 
NSSO
National Single Sign-On
NKN
National Knowledge Network
NMM
National Mission on Manuscripts
NPP
National Power Portal
NREN
National Research and Education Network 
ONDC
Open Network for Digital Commerce

REPORT
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
Annexure
Annual
2024-2025
284
ORS
Online Registration System
PENCiL
Platform for Effective Enforcement for No Child Labour 
PFMS
Public Financial Management System
PMAY
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana
PMGDISHA
Pradhan Mantri Gramin Digital Saksharta Abhiyan 
PMSYSM
Pradhan Mantri Shram Yogi Maandhan Yojana 
PRAGATI
Proactive Governance and Timely Implementation
PRIME
Project Review & Information Management Electronics System 
SAMEER
Society for Applied Microwave Electronics Engineering and Research 
SANKALP
Skill Acquisition and Knowledge Awareness for Livelihood Promotion 
SCAN
Subsidy Claims Application for NFSA
SCOSTA
Smart Card Operating System Specification for Transport Applications
SDWAN
Software-Defined Wide Area Network
SEZ
Special Economic Zone
SFIO
Serious Fraud Investigation Office
SID
Skill India Digital
SMDP
Special Manpower Development Programmes
SMITHA
Smart Meter Integrated Testing and Higher Analysis 
SNMS
Summons and Notices Management System
SPECS
Scheme for Promotion of Manufacturing of Electronic Components and Semiconductors 
SSDG
State Service Delivery Gateway
STPI
Software Technology Parks of India
SWASTHA
Smart Wearable Advanced nanoSensing Technologies in Healthcare ASICs
TCPS
Tactile Cyber-Physical System
TDIL
Technology Development for Indian Languages 
UIDAI
Unique Identification Authority of India
UMANG
Unified Mobile App for New -Age Governance 
ULPIN
Unique Land Parcel Identifier Number
UPI
Unified Payment Interface
USOF
Universal Services Obligation Fund
USSD
Unstructured Supplementary Service Data 
USSP
Unified Shram Suvidha Platform
UTTRA
Universal Transparent Tracking of Applications
UX4G
User experience for Government Websites & Apps 
VVPAT
Voter Verifiable Paper Audit Trail
YUVAi
Youth for Unnati and Vikas with Artificial Intelligence


