Chapter 9
Legislation
Ministry/
Department 
responsible for 
initiating legislation
9.1 Every proposal for legislation in Parliament will be 
initiated in the Ministry/Department to which the subject 
matter of the legislation relates.
Pre-drafting stage
9.2 Pre-drafting stage of a legislative proposal will fall into 
the following four broad sub-stages:
Formulation 
of legislative 
proposals
(a) The Ministry/Department concerned will formulate 
the legislative proposals in consultation with all the 
interests and authorities concerned, essentially from 
administrative and financial points of view. This should 
include a discussion on the necessity for the proposed 
legislation and all matters of substance to be embodied 
therein but not the technical details of the drafting.
Consultation with 
the Ministry of Law 
and Justice
(b) The Ministry/Department concerned will thereafter 
refer the matter to the Ministry of Law and Justice for 
advice as to its feasibility from legal and constitutional 
points of view. The Ministry of Law and Justice 
will, at this stage, advise generally on the necessity 
or desirability of such legislation in the light of the 
existing laws and also constitutional validity of the 
proposals without going into details.
Approval of the 
Cabinet
(c) If it is decided to proceed with the legislation, a self-
contained note will be prepared by the Ministry/
Department concerned in consultation with the Ministry 
of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) and other 
concerned Ministries/Departments.
 

51
Legislation
(d) The Ministry/Department concerned will also send all 
the relevant papers to the Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Legislative Department) with an Office Memorandum 
indicating the precise lines on which it has been decided 
to legislate, to enable that department to take up 
drafting of the requisite Bill. The Office Memorandum 
will contain:
(i) complete details of the legislative proposals;
(ii) the entire background material (placed on the file 
for reference);
(iii) all other details relevant to the proposed Bill; and
(iv) Draft Note for the Cabinet.
The administrative Ministry/Department will not 
attempt a draft of the Bill.
9.3 The Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative 
Department) will then prepare a draft Bill ordinarily within 
thirty days from the date of receipt of the proposal after 
clearance from the Department of Legal Affairs, unless 
any clarifications are required or it is not possible to do so 
for contingencies such as the draftsman being busy with 
budget proposals etc., on the basis of the material made 
available by the concerned Ministry/Department, holding 
discussions with the officers of that Ministry/Department 
for getting various aspects of the Bill clarified, wherever 
considered necessary.
Drafting stage
9.4 The format of the Bill shall be as below:
Format of the Bill
(a) if the Bill contains more than 25 clauses, include in the 
beginning a table showing the arrangement of clauses; 
and
(b) in the case of an amending Bill, contain relevant extracts 
of provisions of original Act sought to be amended.

52
Manual of Parliamentary Procedures
Approval of the 
Cabinet
9.5 Once the Note for the Cabinet, as prepared in consultation 
with the Ministry of Law and Justice and other concerned 
Ministries/Departments, is finalised and the draft of the Bill 
prepared by the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative 
Department) is accepted after scrutiny by the Ministry/
Department concerned, the Ministry/Department will send 
the Note to the Cabinet Secretariat for placing the same 
before the Cabinet for its consideration and approval. The 
Note for the Cabinet will:
 
(a) state the legislative proposals, bringing out clearly the 
need, scope, and object of the proposed legislation;
(b) incorporate the views of other concerned Ministries/
Departments and be also shown to them, if so required 
by the procedure laid down by the Cabinet Secretariat;
(c) set out all the implications of the proposed legislation; 
and
(d) include the draft of the proposed Bill as Appendix II.
Action to be taken 
after Cabinet 
decision
9.6 After the Cabinet approval, the Ministry/Department 
concerned will examine the decision of the Cabinet to see 
whether any change is necessary in the draft Bill submitted 
to the Cabinet. If so, all the relevant papers including the 
decisions of the Cabinet will be sent to the Ministry of Law 
and Justice (Legislative Department) to enable that Ministry/
Department to make necessary changes in the draft Bill 
in consultation with the concerned Ministry/Department 
in accordance with the decisions of the Cabinet. In case, 
however, no modifications are necessary in the Bill after 
the Cabinet approval, the Ministry/Department concerned 
will prepare:
PRO8.1
RSR62
LSR65
Notes on clauses
(a) a Statement of Objects and Reasons relating to the Bill 
to be signed by the Minister;
(b) notes on Clauses to be appended to the Statement of 
Objects and Reasons in case the Bill is of a complicated 
nature;

53
Legislation
(c) Financial Memorandum to be prepared in consultation 
with the Ministry of Finance, in respect of Bills 
involving expenditure, inviting particular attention 
to clauses involving expenditure and also giving an 
estimate of the recurring and non-recurring expenditure 
involved. As clauses involving expenditure are required 
to be printed in thick type, necessary marking may be 
made in the text; and
Financial 
Memorandum
PRO7.2, 7.3
RSR64
LSR69
(d) a Memorandum regarding Delegated Legislation 
explaining the scope of the proposals and stating 
whether they are of a normal or exceptional character.
Memorandum 
regarding Delegated 
Legislation 
PRO 8.4
RSR 65
LSR 70
All the above documents will also be shown to the 
Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) 
before finalization.
9.7.1 After action as in para 9.6 is taken, the Ministry/
Department concerned will obtain :
Obtaining 
recommendation/ 
previous sanction of 
the President 
PRO 8.10
PRO 8.21 to 8.25
(a) recommendation of the President for the introduction 
of any Bill:
(i) seeking the formation of new States or for the 
alteration of areas, boundaries or names of existing 
States (Article 3 of the Constitution); or
(ii) making provision for any of the matters specified in 
sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of Article 110 of the 
Constitution in accordance with Article 117(1); or
(iii) imposing or varying any tax or duty in which States 
are interested (Article 274 of the Constitution); or
(b) the previous sanction of the President for introduction 
of any Bill, making provision for the language to be 
used, for any of the purposes mentioned in Article 
348(1) of the Constitution; and
(c) the recommendation of the President for the 
consideration of the Bill, if it involves expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India (Article 117(3) of 
the Constitution.)

54
Manual of Parliamentary Procedures
PRO 8.22
Note :The recommendation mentioned in (c) above will be 
obtained separately in respect of each House.
9.7.2 For obtaining the recommendation or the previous 
sanction of the President, the Ministry/Department 
will submit through the Minister to the President a self-
contained note with a copy of the note for the Cabinet and 
its decision and a copy of the Bill.
PRO 8.23
9.7.3 
The 
Ministry/Department 
will, 
thereafter, 
communicate the recommendation/previous sanction of 
the President through a letter from the Minister addressed 
to the Secretary General, Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha in the 
form at Annex 7.
9.7.4 To avoid objections of a procedural or constitutional 
nature, the Ministry/Department will submit to the Minister, 
information in the form at Annex 8
Keeping the 
Ministry of 
Parliamentary 
Affairs informed
9.8 To enable the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs to 
draw up the legislative programme of a session, detailed 
particulars about the Bill(s) proposed to be introduced 
during a session will be sent to that Ministry in Part I of 
the form given in Annex 1, at least a month before the 
commencement of the session.
House in which Bill 
is to be introduced
9.9 Bills which attract the provisions of Article 109 read 
with Articles 110(1) and 117(1) of the Constitution will 
be introduced in the Lok Sabha. In the case of the other 
Bills, the House in which they are to be introduced will be 
decided in consultation with the Ministry of Parliamentary 
Affairs.
Printing of the Bill
9.10.1 The Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative 
Department) will send the Bill as finalised, to the 
Government of India Press for obtaining proof copy.
 
9.10.2 After receipt of the proof from the Government of 
India Press, the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative 
Department) will scrutinise proof and :
PRO8.12
(a) send simultaneously two proof copies each of English 
and Hindi versions of the Bill duly authenticated by 
Legislative Counsel to:

55
Legislation
(i) the Secretariat of the House in which it has been 
decided to introduce the Bill (vide para 9.9 above); 
and
(ii) the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs; and
(b) return the file to the Ministry/Department concerned.
9.10.3 The Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha Secretariat gets the 
copy of the Bill printed at every stage and sends a copy of it 
simultaneously to the administrative Ministry/Department 
and to the Legislative Department for scrutiny for ensuring 
accuracy. The administrative Ministry/Department, after 
scrutiny of the Bill, returns it within a day to the Legislative 
Department so as to enable the Legislative Department 
to incorporate corrections/suggestions, if any, and send 
a final scrutinised copy to the Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha 
Secretariat.
9.10.4 After receipt of the scrutinised copies of the Bill from 
the Ministry of Law and Justice(Legislative Department), 
the Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha Secretariat gets copies of the 
Bill circulated to the members, along with errata, if any.
PRO 8.20
9.10.5 Ministries/Departments requiring additional copies 
of Bills should send a requisition in form S.99 to the RS/
LS Secretariat so that it reaches it before the proof copy is 
transmitted by that Secretariat to the press.
PRO 8.20
9.10.6 A similar procedure will be followed for obtaining 
additional copies of reports of Select Committee/Joint 
Committee/Standing Committee on Bills. Requisitions, 
therefore, should be made sufficiently in advance of the 
date of presentation of the report.
PRO 8.28
9.11.1 The concerned Ministry/Department will send a 
notice of the motion for introduction of the Bill, signed 
by the Minister, in the form at Annex 9, to the Secretary 
General, Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha, with a copy to the 
Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs. One printed copy of the 
Bill in each version, duly authenticated by the Minister, 
will be sent to the Secretariat of the House in which the Bill 
is proposed to be introduced.
Procedure for 
introducing the Bill 
in the House
9.11.2 Under the directions of the Chairman/Speaker:

56
Manual of Parliamentary Procedures
SD 19A 
PRO 8.14 
(a) seven days’ notice is normally required for introducing 
an official Bill in the Lok Sabha and five days in case 
of the Rajya Sabha; and
SD 19B
PRO 8.13 
(b) no bill shall be included for introduction in the Rajya 
Sabha/Lok Sabha until after copies thereof have been 
made available to members for at least two days 
before the day on which the Bill is proposed to be 
introduced.
9.11.3 Where exemption is required from the direction 
20A(2) of Directions by the Chairman in Rajya Sabha 
or direction 19A of Directions by the Speaker in Lok 
Sabha, the Minister, while giving full reasons, will request 
the Chairman/Speaker to waive the requirement of this 
direction for introduction of the Bill. Where the exemption 
is required under Chairman Direction 20 B, the Minister 
shall give full reasons in a memorandum for consideration 
of the Chairman explaining as to why the Bill is sought to 
be introduced in Rajya Sabha earlier than two days. Where, 
however, the exemption is required from the direction 19B 
of the Speaker, the Minister while requesting the Speaker 
in this regard will also inform him that he has consulted 
the leaders of various parties in the Lok Sabha and that 
they have no objection to the exemption of the direction 
for introduction of the Bill. The Ministry/Department 
concerned will also forward 300 (three hundred)copies(for 
RS) and 500 (five hundred) copies(for LS) in English and 
100 (one hundred) copies(for RS)and 300 (three hundred) 
copies(for LS) in Hindi of a memorandum in the form 
at Annex 10, including one copy in each version duly 
authenticated by the Minister, to the Rajya/ Lok Sabha 
Secretariat respectively for circulation among members.
9.11.4  On the date specified by the Ministry of Parliamentary 
Affairs, the Bill is put down for introduction in the Rajya 
Sabha/Lok Sabha and is thereafter published in the Gazette 
of India by the RS/LS Secretariat.

57
Legislation
9.11.5 On a request made by the Minister, the Chairman/
Speaker may permit the publication of the Bill in the gazette 
by the RS/LS Secretariat before its introduction. In such 
cases, the Bill will be put down for introduction without 
asking for the leave of the House. Where, however, such a 
Bill undergoes any change before its formal introduction, 
the procedure as in sub-para 9.11.1 will be followed.
Publication before 
introduction
PRO 8.7
RSR 61
LSR 64
9.11.6 The Departmentally related Parliamentary Standing 
Committees examine such Bills as are referred to these 
committees by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha or the Speaker, 
Lok Sabha, as the case may be, and make reports thereon. 
Normally, Bills other than the Appropriation Bills, Finance 
Bills, Bills seeking to replace Ordinances and Bills of 
trivial nature, are referred to the respective Standing 
Committees (Annex 23b) for their examination and report. 
The Standing Committees may present their reports on the 
Bills in the subsequent Parliament session and sometimes, 
may take even longer, to present their reports. Where, 
however, there is urgency in enacting the legislation, the 
Minister concerned, while giving the reasons therefor, 
under intimation to the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs, 
may request the Presiding Officer of the House in which 
the Bill was introduced not to refer the Bill to the Standing 
Committee so that it could be considered and passed by the 
Houses during the ongoing Parliament Session.
RSR 270
LSR 331
9.11.7 In case of Bills referred to Standing Committees 
for examination, the Ministry/Department concerned may 
examine the report of the committee when it is presented 
to the Houses or to the Presiding Officers. Where the 
Ministry/Department decides, with the approval of its 
Minister, to affect change(s) in the provisions of the Bill as 
introduced in the House, on the basis of recommendations 
of the committee, it may obtain the approval of the Cabinet 
to the amendments proposed to be made in the Bill. After 
Cabinet approval, notice of motion of amendments to be 
moved by the Minister in the House should be finalised 
in consultation with the Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Legislative Department).

58
Manual of Parliamentary Procedures
The notice of motion of amendments so finalised along 
with the notice for consideration and passing of the Bill, 
duly signed by the Minister, should then be sent to the 
Secretary-General of the concerned House under intimation 
to the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs and the Ministry of 
Law and Justice (Legislative Department).
Motions after 
introduction
RSR 69
LSR 74 
9.12 After the Bill is introduced, the Minister may send to 
the Secretary-General, Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha, notice in 
the appropriate form at Annex 11,12,13, 14 of his intention 
to move:
(a) that it be taken into consideration and passed; or
(b) that it be referred to a Select Committee of the House; 
or
(c) that it be referred to a Joint Committee of both Houses 
with the concurrence of the other House [except in the 
case of Bills referred to in para 9.7.1 (a)(ii)]; or
(d) that it be circulated for eliciting public opinion.
Withdrawal of a 
Bill
RSR 118
LSR 110
SD 36
PRO 8.33
9.13 If it becomes necessary at any stage to withdraw a 
Bill, the Ministry of Law and Justice and the Ministry of 
Parliamentary Affairs will be consulted and approval of the 
Cabinet will be obtained. Where, however, for want of time, 
it is not possible to obtain prior approval of the Cabinet, 
the Minister in-charge will take a decision in consultation 
with the Prime Minister. As soon as possible thereafter, a 
note in the usual form will be submitted for ex post facto 
approval of the Cabinet. The form of notice of withdrawal 
will depend on the stage at which the Bill is, and whether 
it has been passed by one House and pending before the 
other House. The forms at Annex 15 and 16, as may be 
appropriate, will be used for the purpose. A statement 
duly authenticated by Minister (English and Hindi) giving 
reasons for the withdrawal will also be sent to the RS/LS 
Secretariat at least five days before the date on which the 
motion for withdrawal is to be made. 

59
Legislation
The number of copies to be sent for circulation will be 300 
(three hundred) in English and 100 (one hundred) in Hindi 
for the Rajya Sabha Secretariat and 650 (six hundred and 
fifty)in English 350 (three hundred and fifty) in Hindi for 
the Lok Sabha Secretariat. 
9.14.1 The strength of the Select/Joint Committee as also 
the date by which it will submit its report will be indicated 
by the concerned Ministry/Department and the names of 
the members to be appointed on the committee will be 
suggested by the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs. These 
details will be incorporated in the body of the motion in the 
form at Annex 12 or 13. On this motion being passed by 
one House a concurrence motion in the form at Annex 17 
will be moved by the Minister in the other House, if the bill 
is proposed to be referred to a Joint Committee.
Composition of 
the Select/Joint 
Committee
9.14.2 After the Committee has been constituted, its 
Chairman is appointed by the Chairman/Speaker. All 
matters connected with the meetings of the Select/Joint 
Committee are looked after by the RS/LS Secretariat. A 
Minister, even though he is not a member of a committee, 
may address the committee with the permission of the 
Chairman.
RSR 76
LSR 299
9.14.3 All notices of Government amendments to the Bills 
referred to Select/Joint Committee will be drafted by the 
Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department). 
Notices of such amendments will be given by a Minister 
who is a member of the committee, in the form at Annex 
18 to the RS/LS Secretariat, at least a day before the day of 
sitting at which the amendments are to be moved.
Amendments to 
Bills before Select/ 
Joint Committee 
PRO 8.26
9.15 When a Bill is to be circulated for eliciting public 
opinion, necessary action is taken by the RS/LS Secretariat, 
which also addresses the State Governments.
Procedure when 
a Bill is to be 
circulated for public 
opinion 
SD 20-23
9.16 After presentation of the report of the Select/Joint 
committee to the House, the Minister in charge may give 
notice of his intention to move that the Bill as reported by 
the Select/Joint Committee :
Procedure after 
presentation of the 
report of Select/
Joint Committee 
RSR 93
LSR 77
(a) be taken into consideration and be passed; or

60
Manual of Parliamentary Procedures
(b) be recommitted to the same committee or another 
committee; or
(c) be recirculated for obtaining further public opinion.
9.17 When the motion that:
(a) the Bill be taken into consideration; or
(b) the Bill as reported by the Select/Joint Committee be 
taken into consideration is carried, the Bill will be 
taken up for clause-by-clause consideration. Members 
can, at that stage, move amendments to the Bill.
Amendments
9.18.1 Copies of amendments given notice of by members 
are sent by the RS/LS Secretariat to the Ministry/
Department concerned. When they are received, the branch 
officer will put them up with briefs for use of the Minister 
for determining the Government’s response to them.
9.18.2 Government amendments will also be moved at 
this stage. These amendments, will be drafted by the 
Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) in 
consultation with the administrative Ministry/Department. 
After approval, notice of amendments, both in English 
and Hindi version will be sent by the Minister to the 
Secretary General, for which the form at Annex 19 will be 
used. Copies of this notice are also to be endorsed to the 
Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs and the Ministry of Law 
and Justice (Legislative Department).
9.18.3 Amendments falling within Articles 117(1) and 274 
of the Constitution are subject to the same restrictions in 
regard to the recommendation or the previous sanction of 
the President as Bills falling within those articles (vide para 
9.7.1) except when the amendments falling within Article 
117(1) involve reduction or abolition of any tax.
Cabinet Sectt. 
O.M.No. 11/1/4/72-
CF dt.1-11-72
9.18.4 Time permitting, proposals to amend the provisions 
of a Bill will be submitted to the Cabinet for approval. 
Where, however, for want of time, this is not possible, the 
Minister in charge will take a decision in consultation with 
the Prime Minister. As soon as possible thereafter, a note in 
the usual form will be submitted for ex post facto approval 
of the Cabinet.

61
Legislation
9.19 After a Bill is passed by a House:
Scrutiny by 
Ministry of Law & 
Justice
PRO 8.29
SD 34
(a) a copy of the Bill, as passed is sent by the RS/
LS Secretariat to the Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Legislative Department) for scrutiny with a view to 
correcting patent errors and for making such other 
changes as are consequential to the amendments 
accepted by the House; and
(b) such changes as are accepted by the Chairman/Speaker 
are incorporated in the Bill, before it is transmitted to 
the other House for concurrence.
9.20.1 After the Bill is laid on the Table of the other House, 
the Minister concerned will give notice of a motion in the 
form at Annex 20 to the Secretary-General of the House and 
also communicate the recommendation of the President, 
wherever necessary.
Consideration of 
the Bill in the other 
House
RSR 122 
LSR 115
9.20.2 In the case of a Bill passed by one House with 
amendments, the Ministry/Department concerned will 
determine whether any consequential changes are required 
in the Financial Memorandum and/or Memorandum 
regarding Delegated Legislation. If any change is required, 
a letter will be sent in the form at Annex 21, signed by the 
Minister-in-charge of the Bill, addressed to the Secretary-
General, Rajya/Lok Sabha forwarding revised memoranda, 
which will be prepared in consultation with the Ministry 
of Finance/Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative 
Department), as may be appropriate.
Consequential 
revision of 
the Financial 
Memorandum 
and the one 
on delegated 
legislation 
PRO 8.2 to 8.5
9.20.3 Ministries/Departments should ensure that all official 
communications pertaining to the legislative business of 
the House required to be listed on a particular day should 
reach the Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha Secretariats before 6.00 
p.m. the previous day.
Time limit for 
sending notices to 
the Secretariat
9.21 After the Bill is passed by both the Houses:
Further scrutiny 
by Ministry of 
Law and Justice 
and assent of the 
President
(a) a copy is sent by the RS/LS Secretariat to the Ministry 
of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) as 
envisaged in para 9.19 for scrutiny and correction of 
patent errors, etc.

62
Manual of Parliamentary Procedures
 SD 34
(b) on its return from the Ministry of Law and Justice, 
it will be reprinted on azurelaid paper by the RS/LS 
Secretariat with the superscription “as passed by the 
Houses of Parliament.” After it is printed in azurelaid 
paper, it is once again sent to the Ministry of Law & 
Justice for scrutiny.(change by RSS)
RSR 135 
LSR 128 
(c) the RS/LS Secretariat will send to the Secretary to the 
President, through the Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Legislative Department), enclosing two copies of the 
Bill signed by the Chairman/the Speaker together with 
ten spare copies;
PRO 8.32 
(d) whenever the President’s assent is required by a 
particular date, the RS/LS Secretariat, the Ministry 
of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) and the 
Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs will be advised well 
in advance by the Ministry/Department concerned. The 
Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) 
will keep in touch with the President’s Secretariat for 
the purpose; and
(e) the date of assent which is the date on which the Bill 
becomes an Act, is intimated to the concerned Ministry/
Department and the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs 
by the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative 
Department). One copy of the Act bearing the 
President’s signature is retained in the Ministry of Law 
and Justice (Legislative Department) and the other 
copy returned to the RS/LS Secretariat. The President’s 
Secretariat retains one spare copy.
Publication in the 
official gazette
9.22 The Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative 
Department) will:
(a) publish the Act in the Gazette of India Extraordinary;
(b) forward copies of the Act to all State governments for 
publication in their Official Gazettes; and
Printing of copies 
of Act for sale
(c) get copies of the Act printed in a suitable form for sale 
to the general public.
Procedure regarding 
private Member’s 
Bill 
9.23.1 Whenever a Private Member of Parliament gives 
notice of his desire to move for leave to introduce a Bill, the 
RS/LS Secretariat sends a copy of the Bill to the concerned 
Ministry/Department.

63
Legislation
9.23.2 The Ministry/Department concerned will consult 
the Ministry of Law and Justice as to the competence of 
Parliament to enact the measure.
9.23.3 The policy of the Government in relation to the 
Bill will be officially settled in the concerned Ministry/
Department with the approval of Cabinet Committee on 
Parliamentary Affairs. The provisions of paras 5.8.3 and 
5.8.4 will mutatis mutandis apply.
9.23.4 The President’s recommendation required under 
clause (1) and/or (3) of Article 117 of the Constitution 
for the introduction/consideration of private members’ 
Bills will ordinarily be granted unless very exceptional 
circumstances especially warrant withholding of the 
President’s recommendation. In case a Ministry/Department 
feels that the recommendation of the President to a Bill 
should be withheld, that Ministry/Department will supply 
five copies of the brief explaining the circumstances leading 
to such proposal to the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs 
for obtaining the approval of the Cabinet Committee on 
Parliamentary Affairs.
9.24.1 The procedure applicable to Bills will apply mutatis 
mutandis to promulgation of Ordinances under Article 
123(1) of the Constitution.
Ordinances
9.24.2 After the terms of a draft Ordinance have been settled 
in consultation with the Ministry/Department concerned, 
the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) 
will submit through the Minister of the concerned Ministry/
Department and the Prime Minister, for the signature of the 
President, a copy of the Ordinance together with:
(a) a spare copy of the Ordinance;
(b) a copy of the Note for the Cabinet; and
(c) a copy of the decision of the Cabinet relating to the 
Ordinance.
9.24.3 The concerned administrative Ministry/Department 
will inform the Legislative Department the date and time at 
which they had delivered the Ordinance to the President’s 
Secretariat.

64
Manual of Parliamentary Procedures
9.24.4 The Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative 
Department) will:
(a) get the Ordinance published in the Gazette of India 
Extraordinary;
(b) inform the Ministry/Department concerned and the 
Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs as to the promulgation 
of the Ordinance; and
(c) forward copies thereof to all the state governments for 
publication in their official gazettes.
Post-promulgation 
action 
9.25 As soon as the Ordinance is promulgated, the following 
action will be taken:
(a) The Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative 
Department) will supply to the Ministry of Parliamentary 
Affairs seventy-five copies each of Hindi and English 
versions of the Ordinance for being laid on the Table 
of the Houses. The Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Legislative Department) will also supply five copies of 
the Ordinance to Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha Secretariat.
(b) The Ministry/Department concerned will indicate to the 
Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs whether it is proposed 
to replace the Ordinance by an Act of Parliament. The 
Ministry/Department concerned shall also supply sufficient 
number of copies of the Ordinance to Rajya Sabha/Lok 
Sabha Secretariat for circulation to Members.
(c) In case it is decided to replace the Ordinance by an Act 
of Parliament, the concerned Ministry/Department will 
keep ready a Bill relating thereto for introduction as far 
as possible on the opening day of the session.
RSR 66 
LSR 71 
(d) The concerned Ministry/Department will take steps 
to prepare in consultation with the Ministry of Law 
and Justice (Legislative Department), a statement 
explaining the circumstances which necessitated 
legislation by Ordinance. This statement will be laid on 
the Table of the House at the time of introduction of the 
Bill seeking to replace the Ordinance. The statement 
will also be circulated to the members. The number of 
the copies for the purpose will be as in para 4.1(c).

65
Legislation
(e) Whenever an Ordinance, which embodies wholly 
or partly or with modification the provisions of a 
Bill pending before the House, is promulgated, the 
concerned Ministry/Department will lay on the Table 
of each House, at the commencement of the session 
following the promulgation of the Ordinance, a 
statement prepared in consultation with the Ministry of 
Law and Justice (Legislative Department) explaining 
the circumstances which had necessitated immediate 
legislation by Ordinance.
RSR 66
LSR 71
9.26.1 Article 246(4) of the Constitution vests Parliament 
with powers to legislate on any matter in relation to 
the Union Territories listed in the First Schedule to the 
Constitution.
Legislation in 
respect of Union 
territories
9.26.2 Of the various Union Territories:
(a) Puducherry has a Legislative Assembly under the 
Government of Union Territories Act, 1963, with 
powers to legislate on matters specified in List II (State 
List) and List III (Concurrent List) in so far as any such 
matter as applicable in relation to Union Territories;
(b) The Union Territories of the Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands, Chandigarh, Daman and Diu, Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli and Lakshadweep have an Advisory Committee 
each, set up by the Ministry of Home Affairs;
(c) The National Capital Territory of Delhi has a Legislative 
Assembly under Article 239 AA of the Constitution of 
India read with the Government of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi Act, 1991, with powers to legislate 
on matters specified in List II (State List) or in List 
III (Concurrent List) in so far as any such matter is 
applicable to Union Territories except matters with 
respect to Entries 1, 2 and 18 of the State List and 
Entries 64, 65 and 66 of that List in so far as they relate 
to the said Entries 1, 2 and 18.
9.27.1 Proposals for Parliamentary legislation for the Union 
Territories will be initiated by the Ministry/Department 
concerned, which will consult:
Parliamentary 
legislation for 
Union Territories

66
Manual of Parliamentary Procedures
(a) the Ministry of Home Affairs on the desirability of 
undertaking the proposed legislation and the principles 
involved therein, including the substance of the more 
important provisions thereof; and
(b) the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal 
Affairs) from the constitutional and legal points of 
view.
9.27.2 Thereafter the Ministry/Department concerned 
will:
(a) consult other Ministries/Departments concerned with 
any aspect of the subject matter of the legislation;
(b) refer the matter to the Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Legislative Department) for preparing a draft Bill;
(c) send the Bill where the matter relates to entries in 
List II (State List) or List III (Concurrent List) to the 
Ministry of Home Affairs for obtaining the views of the 
Advisory Committee concerned, if it relates to a Union 
Territory having such a Committee.
9.27.3 Thereafter the Ministry/Department concerned will 
take steps to obtain the approval of the Cabinet and introduce 
the proposed legislation in Parliament in accordance with 
the procedure already described in this chapter for central 
legislation.
Legislation by 
the Legislative 
Assemblies
9.28.1 Section 3 of the Government of Union Territories 
Act, 1963, provides for constitution of a Legislative 
Assembly in the Union Territory of Puducherry. The Rules 
of the Business of the said Union Territory of Puducherry 
provide that the administrator shall refer for prior approval 
to the Central Government, every Bill which:
(a) if passed by the Legislative Assembly, is required to be 
reserved for the consideration of the President under 
section 21 or section 25 of the said Act;
(b) relates to any matter enumerated in List III (Concurrent 
List);
(c) attracts the provisions of Article 304 of the Constitution 
as applicable to the Union territories;

67
Legislation
(d) relates to any matter which may ultimately necessitate 
additional financial assistance from the Central 
Government through substantive expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of the Union Territory or 
abandonment of revenue or lowering of the rate of any 
tax;
(e) pertains to any matter relating to universities; and
(f) affects or is likely to affect the interests of any minority 
community, Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes.
9.28.2 References relating to prior approval to such Bills 
will:
(a) except in regard to para 9.28.1(c) above, be dealt with 
in the Ministry of Home Affairs; and
(b) in regard to para 9.28.1(c), be dealt with in the 
Department of Commerce in consultation with the 
Ministry of Home Affairs.
In all cases, these references will be dealt with in consultation 
with the other Ministries/Departments concerned and the 
Ministry of Law and Justice.
9.29.1 Section 3 of the Government of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi Act, 1991, provides for constitution of a 
Legislative Assembly in the National Capital Territory of 
Delhi. The transaction of Business of the Government of 
National Capital Territory of Delhi Rules provide that the 
Lieutenant Governor shall refer to the Central Government 
every Bill which:
(a) if passed by the Legislative Assembly, is required to 
be reserved for consideration of the President under 
the proviso to sub-clause (c) of clause (3) of Article 
239AA or, as the case may be, under the second proviso 
to section 24 of the Act;
(b) attracts provisions of Articles 286, 287, 288 and 304 of 
the Constitution as applicable to the Capital; and

68
Manual of Parliamentary Procedures
(c) relates to any matter which may ultimately necessitate 
additional financial assistance from the Central 
Government through substantive expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of the Capital or abandonment of 
revenue or lowering of rate of any tax.
9.29.2 Subject to any instructions which may be issued 
from time to time by the Central Government, the 
Lieutenant Governor shall make a prior reference to the 
Central Government in the Ministry of Home Affairs or 
to the appropriate Ministry with a copy to the Ministry of 
Home Affairs in respect of the following matters:
(i) proposals affecting relations of Central Government 
with any State government, the Supreme Court of India 
or any other High Court;
(ii) proposals for the appointment of Chief Secretary 
or Commissioner of Police, Secretary (Home) and 
Secretary (Lands);
(iii) important cases which affect or are likely to affect 
peace and tranquillity of the National Capital Territory; 
and
(iv) cases which affect or are likely to affect the interests 
of any minority community, the Scheduled Castes/
Scheduled Tribes or Backward Classes.
9.29.3 References relating to prior approval to such Bills 
will:
(a) except in regard to para 9.29.1(c) above, be dealt with 
in the Ministry of Home Affairs; and
(b) in regard to para 9.29.1(c), be dealt with in the 
Department of Commerce in consultation with the 
Ministry of Home Affairs.
In all cases, these references will be dealt with in 
consultation with the other Ministries/Departments 
concerned and the Ministry of Law and Justice.

69
Legislation
9.30 All references relating to Bills passed by the Legislative 
Assemblies of the Union Territory of Puducherry and the 
National Capital Territory of Delhi and reserved by the 
Administrator for consideration of the President, will be 
dealt with in the Ministry of Home Affairs who will submit 
such Bills to the President after consulting the Ministry 
of Law and Justice and other Ministries/Departments 
concerned.
9.31 In every case in which the Lt. Governor of the Union 
Territory of Puducherry and the Lieutenant Governor of 
the National Capital Territory of Delhi is empowered to 
promulgate Ordinances (Article 239B of the Constitution 
in the case of Puducherry and Article 239AA(8) read with 
Article 239B in the case of NCT of Delhi), prior instructions 
of the President have to be obtained. The procedure 
indicated in paragraphs 9.28 and 9.29 above, in regard to 
Bills will, with necessary changes, apply to obtaining such 
prior instructions.
Ordinances
9.32 Under the provisions** of the relevant sections of the 
enactments relating to the Union Territories, the Central 
Government is competent to extend, by notification, any 
enactment in force in a State to the Union Territories of 
(a) Chandigarh, (b) Dadra and Nagar Haveli, (c) Delhi, 
(d) Daman and Diu, and (e) Puducherry. All proposals for 
such extension will be dealt with in the Ministry of Home 
Affairs who will examine them in consultation with the 
Ministry of Law and Justice, other Ministries/Departments 
concerned and also the Adminstration of the concerned 
Union Territory if considered necessary.
Extension of 
enactments
9.33.1 Article 240 of the Constitution empowers the 
President to make Regulations for the peace, progress and 
good governance of the Union territories of (a) Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands, (b) Dadar and Nagar Haveli, (c) 
Daman and Diu, (d) Lakshadweep, and (e) Puducherry. 
However, in the case of Union Territory of Puducherry, this 
power is available only when the Legislative Assembly of 
Puducherry is dissolved or its operation is suspended.
Regulations

70
Manual of Parliamentary Procedures
9.33.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs shall initiate the 
proposals for promulgation of Regulations in consultation 
with the Ministries administratively concerned with the 
subject matter of the Regulation. After the Regulation is 
approved by the Cabinet, it is finalised by the Legislative 
Department and submitted to the President through the 
Minister of Home Affairs.
**(i) Section 87 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 in 
the case of Chandigarh.
(ii) Section 10 of the Dadra and Nagar Haveli Act, 1961 in 
the case of Dadra and Nagar Haveli.
(iii) Section 2 of the Union Territories (Laws) Act, 1950 in 
the case of Delhi.

Chapter 11
Subordinate Legislation
Introduction
11.1.1 The Constitution of India as well as Laws made by 
Parliament usually vest the powers in the Government to 
make and notify in the Gazette of India, rules, regulations, 
bye-laws etc., to subserve the objectives behind the main 
legislation, but within their broad framework. As these 
rules etc., are statutory in character, they come within the 
scope of what is termed as ‘Subordinate Legislation’.
11.1.2 The Ministry/Department concerned will frame the 
rules etc., and refer them to the Ministry of Law and Justice 
who will vet them from constitutional, legal and drafting 
point of view.
11.1.3 To facilitate speedier disposal of cases and avoid 
unnecessary 
correspondence, 
Ministries/Departments 
may ensure fulfilment of the points given in the checklist 
below, before referring the cases relating to Subordinate 
Legislation to the Ministry of Law and Justice:
CHECKLIST
(i) As regards Principal rules, regulations, orders etc.:
(a) consultation with the authorities which are required 
to be consulted have been made by the administrative 
Ministry/Department;
(b) where rules, etc., are to have effect retrospectively 
(in cases where parent Act or the Constitution empowers 
retrospective operation), an explanatory memorandum 
has been added in the form of a note explaining that 
the interests of no person shall be adversely affected by 
such retrospective effect;

76
Manual of Parliamentary Procedures
(c) where existing rules etc., are sought to be superseded 
or repealed, up-to-date copies of such rules, etc. are 
placed on the file for reference.
(d) approval of authorities competent to approve such 
proposal has been obtained.
(ii) As regards amending rules, regulations, orders etc.:
(a) up-to-date copies of the principal rules or copies 
of such rules along with subsequent amendments, are 
placed on the file for reference;
(b) footnote indicating the gazette references of the 
principal rules and all subsequent amending rules is 
appended to the draft;
(c) approval of authorities competent to approve such 
proposal has been obtained;
(d) where rules, etc., are to take effect retrospectively (in 
cases where parent Act or the Constitution empowers 
retrospective operation), an explanatory memorandum 
has been added in the form of a note explaining that the 
interests of no person shall be adversely affected; and
(e) consultation with the authorities which are to be 
consulted have been made.
(iii)As regards rules, etc., to be finally published after they 
have been previously published for general information, 
the preamble to the draft should contain:
(a) the notification number with which the draft has 
been published and the date of the gazette in which the 
draft rules were published;
(b) the date on which the gazette copies containing the 
draft rules were made available to the public;
(c) the last date fixed for receipt of public comments;
(d) all references made to the Ministry/Department 
should be accompanied with a self-contained note 
explaining the proposal; and

77
Subordinate Legislation
(e) in time-bound cases the administrative Ministry/
Department should specifically indicate the same by 
some method in the file itself. Those cases, wherever 
possible, may be settled after discussion by an officer 
of appropriate level with the concerned legislative 
counsels.
11.2 Where an Act requires previous publication of rules, 
etc., made thereunder, the Ministry/Department concerned 
will:
Procedure where 
pre-publication of 
rules etc. is required
(a) frame the draft rules;
(b) get them published in the official gazette inviting 
objections and suggestions within a specified period of 
30 days;
(c) if suggestions have to be obtained from interests 
concerned who are likely to be affected by the 
legislation, attempt should be made to get their 
comments at the earliest by sending registered letters 
to them and, if necessary, by publication of the draft 
rules in the national or regional press/newspapers;
(d) on expiry of the specified period of 30 clear days, which 
will be reckoned from the date on which the gazette 
is made available for sale to the public, consider the 
objections and suggestions received;
(e) if the suggestions/objections received are large, the 
final rules should be notified within a period of six 
months from the last date of receiving the comments. If 
no objections/suggestions are received or the number 
of objections etc., so received is small, the rules should 
be finally notified within a period of 3 months; and
(f) finalize the rules in consultation with the Ministry of 
Law and Justice.
11.3.1 Statutory rules, regulations and bye-laws will be 
framed within a period of six months from the date on 
which the relevant statute came into force. Cases in which, 
for any reasons, this is not possible, will be brought to 
the notice of the Secretary and the Minister at the earliest 
possible stage.
Time limit for 
framing rules. 
Cabinet Secretariat 
O.M.No. 6/1/13/71-
CF dt 25-8-71

78
Manual of Parliamentary Procedures
11.3.2 In case the Ministries/Departments are not able to 
frame the rules within the prescribed period of six months, 
they should seek extension of time from the Committee 
on Subordinate Legislation stating reasons for such 
extension; such extension being not more than for a period 
of three months at a time. The request should be made after 
obtaining the approval of the Minister.
Notifying the rules 
etc. in the gazette
11.4 After the rules, etc., are finalised, steps will be taken 
by the Ministry/Department concerned to publish them in 
the gazette and, where the Act provides for it, to lay them 
on the Table of each House. The procedure to be followed 
in this regard has been described in para 11.5.
Laying of rules etc. 
on the Table of each 
House
11.5.1 After publication, the rules, etc., will be laid on the 
Table of the House as soon as possible and, in any case, 
within a period of 15 days (30 days in case of notifications 
relating to a state under the President’s rule), reckoned 
from:
PRO 6.15
(a) the date of their publication in the official gazette if the 
House is in session; or
PRO 6.15
(b) the date of commencement of the next session, if the 
House is not in session.
PRO 6.1(a)
11.5.2 Two authenticated copies of the rules, etc.(one each 
in English and Hindi) will be sent to the RS/LS Secretariat 
for being laid on the Table of the House together with a 
statement containing the following information:
(a) brief purport;
(b) name of the Act and number of the Section under which 
the paper is to be laid;
(c) ‘G.S.R.’ or ‘S.O.’ number of the notification and the 
number of part and section of the gazette in which 
published;
(d) date of publication in the gazette;
(e) date on which it is proposed to be laid;
(f) whether under the Act, the rules, etc., are subject to 
modification by the House;

79
Subordinate Legislation
(g) period for which they are required to be laid before the 
Houses; and
(h) reasons for delay, if undue delay has taken place to lay 
them on the Table of the House and/or if there is delay 
beyond six months in the framing of the rules etc., the 
delay statement(both in English and Hindi) has to be 
authenticated by the Minister concerned.
11.5.3 As per Ministry of Urban Development (PSP 
Division) Gazette Notification NO.G.S.R. 746(E) in Part-
II Section (3) (i) Extra Ordinary, dated 30th September, 
2015, Gazette Notifications shall be only e-published by 
uploading on the website www.egazette.nic.in to do away 
with physical printing and sale of hard copies. This has 
been done in accordance with the provisions of Section 8 
of Information Technology Act, 2000 in consultation with 
Department of Legal Affairs. 
11.5.4 (i) Administrative Ministry/ Department submitting 
the request for publishing the Gazette Notification shall be 
solely responsible for submitting and circulating the gazette 
notification wherever required by law or otherwise.
(ii) As published Gazette Notifications are instantly 
uploaded on the official website www.egazette.nic.
in, the downloaded electronic version as well as the 
downloaded and printed version of these Gazette 
Notifications will be treated as electronic versions for 
all official purposes as per Section 4 and Section 8 of 
Information Technology Act, 2000.
(iii)Lok Sabha Secretariat and Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
will be supplied with three hard copies of all statutory 
orders and will also be sent a soft copy on email Id 
cosl-lss@sansad.nic.in 
and 
rsc1sub@sansad.nic.in 
respectively, simultaneously with notification in 
e-Gazette format including those framed under Article 
309 of the Constitution of India and those published in 
Part II Section 3 (i), 3(ii) & 4 of Gazette for scrutiny 
and upkeep of records.

80
Manual of Parliamentary Procedures
(iv)In the case of Notifications amending the earlier 
statutory orders , the concerned Ministry should also 
supply, by way of suitable annexure, the relevant 
extracts of the provisions which have been amended 
by the said notification for the sake of reference during 
their scrutiny.
(v) Statutory orders, more particularly those notified under 
Article 309 of the Constitution of India must be laid 
before the Parliament by the concerned administrative 
Ministries and they will be held responsible for non-
compliance of the same.
11.5.5 The period for which such rules should remain laid 
on the Table of each House is prescribed by the Act. For 
deciding the dates on which the papers sent by them were 
actually laid on the Table of the House, the Bulletin Part 
I will be consulted. In case Hindi and English versions 
of such rules, etc., are laid on the Table of the Houses on 
different dates, the statutory period for which the rules, 
etc., are required to be laid will be calculated from the later 
of the two dates.
11.5.6 Where the number of Notifications to be laid on 
the Table by a Ministry/Department during a particular 
Session is large, the Ministry/Department should plan out 
its schedule in advance by staggering the papers evenly 
over the whole Session instead of waiting for the last few 
days of the Session.
11.5.7 While laying of amendment and/or Corrigenda to 
rules, Ministry/Department should send copies of the rules 
duly authenticated by the Minister concerned, instead of 
laying the uncorrected copy along with corrigenda. Ministry/
Department should examine whether there is necessity of 
assigning a separate G.S.R. No. to a corrigendum at the 
time of its publication in the Gazette and whether such a 
corrigendum should not be published without assigning 
any G.S.R. No. Ministry/Department should ensure supply 
of only corrected copies of the rules for laying on the Table 
so that they depict a true and correct picture and serve the 
desired purpose.

81
Subordinate Legislation
11.6.1 After the termination of each session, the Ministry/
Department will examine the rules, etc., laid on the Table 
of each House to see whether the prescribed period for 
which they were to be laid has been completed. If not, 
an intimation stating the date (which should be, as far as 
possible, the first day of the following session allotted to 
the Ministry/Department concerned) for relaying should 
be furnished to the RS/LS Secretariat at least 3 clear days 
before the date on which it is to be re-laid. Such rules etc., 
when re-laid, need not be accompanied by authenticated 
or spare copies, unless there has been a change in the 
incumbency of the Minister who had laid it in the House 
earlier.
Relaying of the 
rules etc. on the 
Table of the House 
PRO 6.11, 6.12 
LSR 234
11.6.2 In the event of the dissolution of the Lok Sabha before 
the expiry of the full period prescribed, the concerned rule, 
etc., will be laid afresh in the new Lok Sabha for the full 
prescribed period.
PRO 6.13
11.7.1 After the notifications regarding rules, etc., are laid 
on the Table of the House, any member may give notice of 
an annulment or modification thereto.
Annulment or 
modification to 
rules etc. laid on the 
Table of the House 
LSR 235
11.7.2 On receipt of a notice for annulment or modification 
of the rules, etc., the Parliament Unit will immediately 
bring it to the notice of the Joint Secretary in-charge of 
Parliament Section in the Ministry/Department concerned, 
who will:
(a) put it up immediately for obtaining the orders of the 
Minister for arranging a discussion of the matter in 
Parliament before the expiry of the statutory period 
provided for annulment or modification by Parliament;
(b) settle with the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs the 
date to be fixed for the debate; and
(c) submit a brief for use of the Minister during the 
discussion.
11.7.3 Where a motion to annul or modify the rules, etc., is 
carried in one House, it is transmitted to the other House by 
the RS/LS Secretariat.

82
Manual of Parliamentary Procedures
When it is carried in the other House also, the Ministry/
Department concerned will take steps to annul or modify 
the rules, etc., notify them in the official gazette and lay 
them on the Table of each House vide para 11.5.1.
11.7.4 (i) Where the parent Act provides that the rules, etc., 
framed thereunder will come into force after the approval 
of the Parliament, the Ministry/Department will address a 
motion in the prescribed form (Annex 22) to the Secretary-
General, Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha, under intimation to the 
Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs. The date for discussion 
of such a motion will be settled by the Ministry of 
Parliamentary Affairs in consultation with the Ministry/
Department concerned. In such a case, a brief will also be 
prepared for the use of the Minister.
Giving retrospective 
effect to rules 
(ii) In cases where the parent Act provides for giving of 
retrospective effect, the rules framed thereunder should 
be accompanied by an explanatory note setting out there 
in the reasons and circumstances which necessitated 
the giving of such retrospective effect. The note 
should also indicate that the interests of no one will be 
prejudicially affected by giving retrospective effect. In 
cases where the parent Act does not provide for giving 
retrospective effect but retrospective effect is proposed 
to be given due to unavoidable circumstances, prior 
action should be taken to clothe it with legal sanction 
for the purpose.
M.P.A. O.M. 
No.32(57)/73-R&C 
dt. 22-9-1973
11.7.5 All amendments to rules and regulations will be 
published in the official gazette. If two or more amendments 
to the same rules or regulations are to be published in the 
same issue of the gazette, they will be assigned order 
numbers in the same sequences as those assigned to the 
amendments to the said rules etc. and also published in that 
order.
Committees 
on Subordinate 
Legislation 
RSR 209
LSR 320
11.8 The committees on Subordinate Legislation constituted 
by the Chairman/Speaker scrutinize all rules etc. laid on 
the Table of the concerned House. The report containing 
the recommendations of the committee is submitted to the 
House by the Chairman of the committee.

83
Subordinate Legislation
11.9.1 (i) Soon after the presentation of the report by the 
committee:
(a) the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs will process such 
recommendations made by the committee as are of a 
general nature and concern more than one Ministry/
Department.
Action on the report 
of the committee
(b) The Ministry/Department concerned will take prompt 
action on the recommendation which primarily concern 
them and ensure that “action taken statements” are sent 
direct to the Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha Secretariat, as 
the case may be, under intimation to the Ministry of 
Parliamentary Affairs within the period of six months 
from the date of the presentation of the report.
(ii) Where the Ministry/Department concerned accepts a 
recommendation, it will communicate the acceptance 
to the Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha Secretariat, under 
intimation to the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs, 
within one month. Where, however, a recommendation 
is not acceptable to the concerned Ministry/Department, 
or the Ministry/Department feels any difficulty in 
giving effect to it, it will:
(a) submit a brief to the Minister giving the reasons for 
not accepting it; and
(b) after obtaining his approval, communicate the 
comments of the Ministry/Department to the Rajya 
Sabha/Lok Sabha Secretariat, as the case may be, under 
intimation to the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs, 
within three months.
(iii) In case of accepted recommendations, the Ministry/
Department should implement them within three months 
from the date of intimation of the recommendations.
(iv) In case where preliminary procedure like consultations 
with other bodies, inviting public comments, etc. have 
to be gone through, this period may be extended by 
another three months.
(v) In any case, all accepted recommendations should be 
implemented within six months.

84
Manual of Parliamentary Procedures
(vi)In case, where the Ministry/Department is definitely of 
the view that the period of six months is insufficient for 
finalization of action, it should approach the Committee 
within three months of the date of intimation of the 
recommendation so that the Committee may consider 
its difficulties, if any.
11.9.2 Where it is proposed to amend the rules on the basis 
of the recommendations of the committee, the Ministry/
Department concerned will take steps to amend the rules, 
notify the amended rules, etc., in the official gazette and to 
lay them on the Table of each House (vide paras 11.4 and 
11.5.1).
11.10 As soon as an Act comes into force, it should be 
examined to ascertain the specific sections conferring 
power to make rules, regulations, bye-laws, orders, etc.
11.11 A register should be maintained by the concerned 
section in each Ministry/Department, specifying the 
various stages of processing the legislation, e.g., name of 
the enactment, date of its coming into force, sections (with 
any sub-sections etc.) conferring legislative powers on the 
government; whether power has been given to an agency 
other than Central Government for framing the rules and 
also identify the various stages of processing the rules, 
namely, framing of the draft rules, notification thereof in 
the gazette, if necessary, consideration of objections and 
suggestions, finalisation of rules in consultation with the 
Ministry of Law and Justice, the translation thereof, and 
final notification in the gazette. The above register should 
be put up by the section concerned to the officer in- charge 
for periodical check with a view to seeing that the process 
of legislation is not held up at any stage for any reason.
11.12 The Ministries/Departments should upload copies 
of all their Acts and the Subordinate Legislations framed 
thereunder on their website so that the public has easy access 
to all the Acts administered by them and the corresponding 
Subordinate Legislations framed by them.

85
Subordinate Legislation
11.13 It is the responsibility of the Ministries/Departments 
to maintain proper database containing the title of rules/
regulations framed under Acts administered by them, the 
Section/Sub-Section under which they have been framed 
and their date of laying on the Table of each House. 
This database should be maintained by the Ministries/
Departments, updated regularly and posted on the website 
of the Ministries/Departments.
11.14 The Ministry/Department should maintain up-to-
date copies of the Acts and rules and regulations, bye-laws, 
etc., framed there under in sufficient numbers. In case the 
number of amendments is large, efforts should be made to 
reprint the Acts or the rules, as the case may be, so as to 
provide a continuous reading.
11.15 Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice 
have been assigned the function regarding compilation 
of general statutory rules and orders made under Acts 
passed by the Parliament in the India Code as per the 
Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 
1961x. Accordingly, a quarterly report in respect of cases 
in which rules/regulations under a statute have not been 
published within six months should be sent regularly to 
the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice 
so that it may be easy for them to compile and scrutinize 
pending cases and to know the reasons for delay in framing 
of rules, etc. as drafting and vetting of the rules, regulations 
etc. are finalized by them.
