 
LEARNING OUTCOMES 
 
  
 
 
CHAPTER 
1 
 
 
 
 
BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
After studying this chapter, you would be able to- 
 
comprehend the meaning of tax and types of taxes; 
 
discern the difference between direct and indirect taxes; 
 
appreciate the components of income-tax law; 
 
comprehend the procedure for computation of total income for the 
purpose of levy of income-tax; 
 
comprehend and appreciate the meaning of the important terms used 
in the Income-tax Act, 1961; 
 
comprehend the meaning and scope of agricultural income and apply 
the same to identify whether a particular income falls within the scope 
of agricultural income; 
 
identify the operations which are partly agricultural and partly non-
agricultural and compute the agricultural income and business income 
arising from such operations; 
 
recognise the previous year and assessment year for the purpose of 
computing income chargeable to tax under the Income-tax Act, 1961; 
 
examine the circumstances when income of the previous year would 
be assessed to tax in the previous year itself; 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.2 
  
apply the rates of tax applicable on different components of total 
income of a person for the purpose of determining the tax liability of 
such person under default tax regime u/s 115BAC; 
 
apply the rates of tax applicable on different components of total 
income of a person for the purpose of determining the tax liability of 
such person, who exercises the option to shift out of the default tax 
regime and pay tax under the optional tax regime as per the normal 
provisions of the Act. 
 
 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Basic Concepts
Components of 
Income-tax Law
Income-tax 
Act, 1961
Annual Finance 
Act
Income-tax 
Rules
Circulars and 
Notifications
Legal decisions
Steps for computation 
of Total Income (TI) 
and tax liability
Determination of 
residential status
Classification of income 
under different heads
Computation of income 
under each head
Clubbing of income of 
spouse, minor child etc.
Set off or carry forward 
& set off of losses
Computation of Gross 
Total Income (GTI)
Deductions from GTI
Computation of TI
Computation of tax 
liability
Important 
Definitions
Assessee
Assessment
Person
Income
India
Assessment 
Year 
Previous Year 
Agricultural 
income
Basis of charge 
& rates of tax
Charge of 
Income-tax 
Rates of 
Income-tax
CHAPTER OVERVIEW 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.4 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 What is the meaning of tax? 
Let us begin by understanding the meaning of tax.  
Article 366(28) of the Constitution of India defines the term “Taxation” as follows –  
“Taxation includes the imposition of any tax or impost, whether general or local or 
special, and tax shall be construed accordingly." 
Taxes are considered to be the “cost of living in a society”. Taxes are levied by the 
Governments to meet the common welfare expenditure of the society. There are 
two types of taxes - direct taxes and indirect taxes. 
Direct Taxes: If tax is levied directly on the income or wealth of a person, then, it 
is a direct tax. The person who pays the tax to the Government cannot recover it 
from somebody else i.e. the burden of a direct tax cannot be shifted. E.g., Income-
tax.   
Indirect Taxes: If tax is levied on the price of a good or service, then, it is an indirect 
tax e.g. Goods and Services Tax (GST) or Custom Duty. In the case of indirect taxes, 
the person paying the tax passes on the incidence to another person.  
 
1.2 Why are taxes levied? 
The reason for levy of taxes is that they constitute the basic source of revenue to 
the Government. Revenue so raised is utilized for meeting the expenses of 
TYPE OF TAXES
DIRECT TAXES
INCOME TAX
TAX ON UNDISCLOSED 
FOREIGN INCOME AND 
ASSETS
INDIRECT TAXES
GOODS AND 
SERVICES TAX (GST)
CUSTOMS DUTY

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.5 
Government like defence, provision of education, health-care, infrastructure 
facilities like roads, dams etc. 
1.3 Power to levy taxes 
The Constitution of India, in Article 265 lays down that “No tax shall be levied or 
collected except by authority of law.” Accordingly for levy of any tax, a law needs to 
be framed by the government. 
Constitution of India gives the power to levy and collect taxes, whether direct or 
indirect, to the Central and the State Government. The Parliament and State 
Legislatures are empowered to make laws on the matters enumerated in the 
Seventh Schedule by virtue of Article 246 of the Constitution of India. 
Seventh Schedule to Article 246 contains three lists which enumerate the matters 
under which the Parliament and the State Legislatures have the authority to make 
laws for the purpose of levy of taxes.  
The following are the lists: 
(i)  
Union List: Parliament has the exclusive power to make laws on the matters 
contained in Union List. 
(ii)  
State List: The Legislatures of any State has the exclusive power to make laws 
on the matters contained in the State List. 
(iii)  Concurrent List: Both Parliament and State Legislatures have the power to 
make laws on the matters contained in the Concurrent list.  
Income-tax is the most significant direct tax. Entry 82 of the Union List 
i.e., List I in the Seventh Schedule to Article 246 of the Constitution of 
India has given the power to the Parliament to make laws on taxes on 
income other than agricultural income. 
1.4 Overview of Income-tax law in India 
In this material, we would be introducing the students to the Income-tax law in India. 
The income-tax law in India consists of the following components – 
 
 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.6 
 
The various instruments of law containing the law relating to income-tax are 
explained below. 
Income-tax Act, 1961 
The levy of income-tax in India is governed by the Income-tax Act, 1961. In this 
book, we shall briefly refer to this as the Act.  
• 
It extends to the whole of India. 
• 
It came into force on 1st April, 1962.  
• 
It contains sections 1 to 298 and schedules I to XIV.  
❖ 
A section may have sub-sections or clauses and sub-clauses.  
➢ 
When each part of the section is independent of each other and 
one is not related with other, such parts are called a “Clause”. “Sub 
section”, on the other hand refers to such parts of a section where 
each part is related with other and all sub sections taken together 
completes the concept propounded in that section.  
 
COMPONENTS 
OF INCOME 
TAX LAW
INCOME TAX 
ACT
ANNUAL 
FINANCE ACT
INCOME TAX 
RULES
CIRCULARS/
NOTIFICATIONS
LEGAL 
DECISIONS OF 
COURTS

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.7 
➢ 
Example  
o 
The clauses of section 2 define the meaning of terms used 
in the Income-tax Act, 1961. Clause (1A) defines 
“agricultural income”, clause (1B) defines “amalgamation” 
and so on. Each one of them is independent of other clause 
of the same section. 
o 
Likewise, the clauses of section 10 contain the exemptions 
in respect of certain income, like clause (1) provides for 
exemption of agricultural income and clause (2) provides for 
exemption of share income of a member of a Hindu 
Undivided Family and so on.  
o 
Section 5 defining the scope of total income has two sub-
sections (1) and (2). Sub-section (1) defines the scope of 
total income of a resident and sub-section (2) defines the 
scope of total income of a non-resident. Each sub section is 
related with the other in the sense that only when one reads 
them all, one gets the complete idea related with scope of 
total income.   
❖ 
A section may also have Provisos and Explanations. 
➢ 
The Proviso(s) to a section/sub-section/clause spells out the 
exception(s)/ condition(s) to the provision contained in the 
respective section/ sub-section/ clause, i.e., the proviso spells out 
the cases where the provision contained in the respective section/ 
sub-section/ clause would not apply or where the provision would 
apply with certain modification. 
➢ 
The Explanation to a section/ sub-section/ clause gives a 
clarification relating to the provision contained in the respective 
section/ sub-section/ clause. 
➢ 
Example 
o 
Sections 80GGB and 80GGC provides for deduction from 
gross total income in respect of contributions made by 
companies and other persons, respectively, to political 
parties or an electoral trust.  

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.8 
o 
The proviso to sections 80GGB and 80GGC provide that no 
deduction shall be allowed under those sections in respect 
of any sum contributed by cash to political parties or an 
electoral trust. Thus, the provisos to these sections spell out 
the circumstance when deduction would not be available 
thereunder in respect of contributions made.  
o 
The Explanation below section 80GGC provides that for the 
purposes of sections 80GGB and 80GGC, “political party” 
means a political party registered under section 29A of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951. Thus, the 
Explanation clarifies that the political party has to be a 
registered political party.  
• 
The Income-tax Act, 1961 undergoes change every year with additions and 
substitutions brought in by the Annual Finance Act passed by Parliament. 
Sometimes, the Income-tax Act, 1961 is also amended through other 
legislations like Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act.  
The Finance Act 
Every year, the Finance Minister of the Government of India introduces the Finance 
Bill in the Parliament’s Budget Session. When the Finance Bill is passed by both the 
houses of the Parliament and gets the assent of the President, it becomes the 
Finance Act. Amendments are made every year to the Income-tax Act, 1961 and 
other tax laws by the Finance Act. 
The First Schedule to the Finance Act contains four parts which specify the rates of tax - 
• 
Part I of the First Schedule to the Finance Act specifies the rates of tax 
applicable for the current Assessment Year. Accordingly, Part I of the First 
Schedule to the Finance Act, 2023 specifies the rates of tax for A.Y. 2023-24. 
• 
Part II specifies the rates at which tax is deductible at source for the current 
Financial Year. Accordingly, Part II of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 
2023 specifies the rates at which tax is deductible at source for F.Y. 2023-24 
• 
Part III gives the rates for calculating income-tax for deducting tax from 
income chargeable under the head “Salaries” and computation of advance 
tax for F.Y. 2023-24 where the assessee exercises the option to shift out of 
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). 
• 
Part IV gives the rules for computing net agricultural income. 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.9 
Income-tax Rules, 1962 
The administration of direct taxes is looked after by the Central Board of Direct 
Taxes (CBDT).  
• 
The CBDT is empowered to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the 
Act.  
• 
For the proper administration of the Income-tax Act, 1961, the CBDT frames 
rules from time to time. These rules are collectively called Income-tax Rules, 
1962.  
• 
Rules also have sub-rules, provisos and Explanations. The proviso to a Rule/ 
Sub-rule spells out the exception to the limits, conditions, guidelines, basis of 
valuation, as the case may be, spelt out in the Rule/ Sub-rule. The Explanation 
gives clarification for the purposes of the Rule.  
• 
It is important to keep in mind that along with the Income-tax Act, 1961, these 
rules should also be studied. 
Circulars and Notifications 
Circulars 
• 
Circulars are issued by the CBDT from time to time to deal with certain specific 
problems and to clarify doubts regarding the scope and meaning of certain 
provisions of the Act.  
• 
Circulars are issued for the guidance of the officers and/or assessees.  
• 
The department is bound by the circulars. While such circulars are not binding 
on the assessees, they can take advantage of beneficial circulars. 
Notifications 
Notifications are issued by the Central Government to give effect to the provisions 
of the Act. The CBDT is also empowered to make and amend rules for the purposes 
of the Act by issue of notifications which are binding on both department and 
assessees.  
Legal decisions of Courts 
Case Laws refer to decision given by courts. The study of case laws is an important 
and unavoidable part of the study of Income-tax law. It is not possible for 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.10 
Parliament to conceive and provide for all possible issues that may arise in the 
implementation of any Act. Hence the judiciary will hear the disputes between the 
assessees and the department and give decisions on various issues.  
The Supreme Court is the Apex Court of the Country and the law laid down by the 
Supreme Court is the law of the land. The decisions given by various High Courts 
will apply in the respective states in which such High Courts have jurisdiction. 
Note – Case laws are dealt with at the Final level.     
2. CHARGE OF INCOME TAX 
Section 4 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 is the charging section which provides that: 
(i) 
Tax shall be charged at the rates prescribed for the year by the Annual 
Finance Act or the Income-tax Act, 1961 or both. 
(ii)   The charge is on every person specified under section 2(31); 
(iii)  Tax is chargeable on the total income earned during the previous year and 
not the assessment year. (There are certain exceptions provided by sections 
172, 174, 174A, 175 and 176); 
(iv) 
Tax shall be levied in accordance with and subject to the various provisions 
contained in the Act. 
This section is the back bone of the law of income-tax in so far as it serves as the 
most operative provision of the Act. The tax liability of a person springs from this 
section. 
A person includes an individual, Hindu Undivided Family (HUF), Association of 
Persons (AOP), Body of Individuals (BOI), a firm, a company etc.   
(1) 
Total Income and Tax Payable 
Income-tax is levied on an assessee’s total income. Such total income has to be 
computed as per the provisions contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961.  
Let us go step by step to understand the procedure for computation of total income 
of an individual for the purpose of levy of income-tax – 
 
 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.11 
Step 1 – Determination of residential status 
The residential status of a person has to be determined to ascertain which income 
is to be included in computing the total income. The residential status as per the 
Income-tax Act, 1961 can be classified as under – 
 
In the case of an individual, the duration for which he is present in India in the 
relevant previous year or relevant previous year and the earlier previous years 
determines his residential status. Based on the days spent by him in India, he may 
be (a) resident and ordinarily resident, (b) resident but not ordinarily resident, or 
(c) non-resident.  
The residential status of a person determines the taxability of the income. For e.g., 
income earned and received outside India will not be taxable in the hands of a non-
resident but will be taxable in case of a resident and ordinarily resident. 
There is also a concept of deemed resident for which presence of individual in India 
is not required. A deemed resident is always a resident but not ordinarily resident 
in India. Determination of residential status has been discussed in Chapter 2.  
Step 2 – Classification of income under different heads 
A person may earn income from different sources. For example, a salaried person 
earns income by way of salary. He also gets interest from bank savings account/ 
fixed deposit. Apart from this, if he has invested in shares, he would be getting 
dividend and when he sells these shares, he may earn profit on such sale. If he owns 
a residential property which he has let out, he would earn rental income.  
Under the Income-tax Act, 1961, for computation of total income, all income of a tax 
payer are classified into five different heads of income. These are shown below – 
RESIDENTIAL STATUS UNDER THE 
INCOME TAX ACT, 1961
RESIDENT
RESIDENT AND 
ORDINARILY RESIDENT
RESIDENT BUT NOT 
ORDINARILY RESIDENT
DEEMED 
RESIDENT
NON-
RESIDENT

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.12 
 
There is a charging section under each head of income which defines the scope of 
income chargeable under that head. These heads of income exhaust all possible 
types of income that can accrue to or be received by the tax payer. Accordingly, 
income earned is classified as follows:  
1. 
Salary, pension etc. earned is taxable under the head “Salaries”. 
2. 
Rental income is taxable under the head “Income from house property”. 
3. 
Income derived from carrying on any business or profession is taxable under 
the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.   
4. 
Profit from sale of a capital asset (like land, building and shares) is taxable 
under the head “Capital Gains”. 
5. 
The fifth head of income is the residuary head. Income which is chargeable 
to tax under the Income-tax Act, 1961 but not taxable under the first four 
heads will be taxed under the head “Income from other sources”. 
The tax payer has to classify the income earned under the relevant head of income.  
Step 3 – Computation of income under each head 
Income is to be computed in accordance with the provisions governing a particular 
head of income.   
Exemptions: There are certain incomes which are wholly exempt from income-tax 
e.g., agricultural income. These incomes have to be excluded and will not form part 
of total income.  
Also, some incomes are partially exempt from income-tax e.g., Commuted pension. 
These incomes are excluded only to the extent of the limits specified in the Act. The 
balance income over and above the prescribed exemption limits would enter 
computation of total income and have to be classified under the relevant head of 
income.  
HEADS OF INCOME
SALARIES
INCOME 
FROM 
HOUSE 
PROPERTY
PROFITS AND 
GAINS OF 
BUSINESS OR 
PROFESSION
CAPITAL 
GAINS
INCOME FROM 
OTHER 
SOURCES

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.13 
Deductions: There are deductions and allowances prescribed under each head of 
income. For example, while calculating income from house property for let out 
property, municipal taxes and interest on loan are allowed as deduction. Similarly, 
deductions and allowances are prescribed under other heads of income. These 
deductions etc. have to be considered before arriving at the net income chargeable 
under each head.  
These exemptions and deductions would be available to the individual depending upon 
the regime in which he pays tax. Tax regime under section 115BAC is the default tax regime 
which provides for concessional rates of tax to individuals/HUFs/AoPs/BoIs/Artificial 
juridical persons. However, certain exemptions and deductions are not allowed under the 
default tax regime. Such assessees have an option to opt out of the said regime and pay 
tax under normal provisions of the Act. These tax regimes i.e., the default tax regime under 
section 115BAC and optional tax regime under the normal provisions of the Act are 
discussed in detail later on in this Chapter. 
For detailed discussion on exemptions and deductions under each head, refer to 
Chapter 3: Heads of Income. 
Disallowance of expenditure in relation to exempt income  
[Section 14A] 
▪ 
As per section 14A, notwithstanding anything to the contrary, 
expenditure incurred in relation to any exempt income is not allowed as a 
deduction while computing income under any of the five heads of income.  
▪ 
The Assessing Officer is empowered to determine the amount of expenditure 
incurred in relation to such income which does not form part of total income in 
accordance with such method as may be prescribed.  
▪ 
The method for determining expenditure in relation to exempt income for the 
purpose of disallowance of such expenditure under section 14A is prescribed by 
the CBDT.  
▪ 
The provisions of section 14A regarding disallowance of expenses would apply 
even in a case where exempt income has not accrued or arisen or has not been 
received during the previous year relevant to an assessment year and the 
expenditure has been incurred during the said previous year in relation to such 
exempt income. 
Step 4 – Clubbing of income of spouse, minor child etc. 
In case of individuals, income-tax is levied on a slab system on the total income. 
The tax system is progressive i.e., as the income increases, the applicable rate of 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.14 
tax increases. Some taxpayers in the higher income bracket have a tendency to 
divert some portion of their income to their spouse, minor child etc. to minimize 
their tax burden.   
In order to prevent such tax avoidance, clubbing provisions have been incorporated 
in the Act, under which income arising to certain persons (like spouse, minor child 
etc.) have to be included in the income of the person who has diverted his income 
for the purpose of computing tax liability. For detailed discussion, refer to Chapter 
4: Income of other persons included in assessee’s total income. 
Step 5 – Set-off or carry forward and set-off of losses 
An assessee may have different sources of income under the same head of income. 
He may have profit from one source and loss from the other. For instance, an 
assessee may have profit from his textile business and loss from his printing 
business. This loss can be set-off against the profits of textile business to arrive at 
the net income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or 
profession”. 
Similarly, an assessee can have loss under one head of income, say, profits and 
gains of business or profession and profits under another heads of income, say, 
income from house property. There are provisions in the Income-tax Act, 1961 for 
allowing inter-head adjustment in certain cases.  
However, there are also restrictions in certain cases, like business loss is not allowed 
to be set-off against salary income. Default tax regime under section 115BAC puts 
further more restrictions like loss from house property cannot be set off from income 
under any other head. Further, losses which cannot be set-off in the current year 
due to inadequacy of eligible profits can be carried forward for set-off in the 
subsequent years as per the provisions contained in the Act. Generally, brought 
forward losses under a particular head cannot be set-off against income under 
another head i.e., brought forward business loss cannot be set-off against income 
from house property of the current year. For detailed discussion, refer to Chapter 
5: Aggregation of income, set-off and carry forward of losses. 
Step 6 – Computation of Gross Total Income 
The final figures of income or loss under each head of income, after allowing the 
eligible deductions, allowances and other adjustments, are then aggregated, after 
giving effect to the provisions for clubbing of income and set-off and carry forward 
of losses, to arrive at the gross total income.  

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.15 
Step 7 – Deductions from Gross Total Income 
There are deductions prescribed from Gross Total Income. Two types of 
deductions are allowable from Gross Total Income - Deductions under Chapter VI-
A and deduction under section 10AA. These deductions would be allowable to the 
assessee who opts out of the default tax regime and pays tax under the optional tax 
regime as per normal provisions of the Act, subject to fulfillment of requisite 
conditions stipulated thereunder.  
 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
(in case of an assessee opting out of the default tax regime)
DEDUCTIONS UNDER CHAPTER-VIA
DEDUCTIONS IN 
RESPECT OF CERTAIN 
PAYMENTS
Examples
1.   Life Insurance Premium  
paid
2.   Contribution to 
Provident Fund/
Pension Fund
3.   Medical insurance 
premium paid 
4.   Payment of interest on 
loan taken for higher   
education
5.    Payment of interest on
loan taken for residential 
house
6.    Payment of interest on 
loan taken for purchase 
of electric vehicle
7.   Rent paid
8.   Donation to certain
funds, charitable
institutions, etc.
9.    Contributions to political 
parties
DEDUCTIONS IN 
RESPECT OF 
CERTAIN INCOMES
Examples
1.
Employment of new 
employees
2.
Royalty income etc. of 
authors of  certain        
books other than text 
books
3.
Royalty on patents
DEDUCTIONS 
IN RESPECT OF  
OTHER INCOME
Examples
1.    Interest on 
deposits in 
saving 
account
2.    Interest on 
deposits in 
case of senior 
citizens
OTHER 
DEDUCTIONS
Example
Deduction
in case of a
person with
disability
DEDUCTION UNDER 
SECTION 10AA

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.16 
However, under the default tax regime under section 115BAC, only select deductions 
are permissible.  
For detailed discussion, refer to Chapter 6: Deductions from Gross Total Income. 
Step 8 – Computation of Total income 
The income arrived at, after claiming the above deductions from the Gross Total Income 
is known as the Total Income. It should be rounded off to the nearest multiple of ` 10 as 
per section 288A. The process of computation of total income is shown hereunder – 
 
COMPUTATION OF TOTAL INCOME 
Determine the residential status 
Classify income under five 
heads 
Salaries 
Income from 
house property 
Profits and gains 
from business or 
profession 
Capital 
gains 
Income from 
other sources 
Compute income under each head applying the charging & deeming 
provisions and providing for permissible deductions/exemptions thereunder 
Apply clubbing provisions 
Set-off/carry forward and  
set-off of losses as per the provisions of the Act/default tax regime 
Compute Gross Total Income (GTI) 
Less: Deductions from GTI 
Total Income (TI) 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.17 
Step 9 – Application of the rates of tax on the total income 
Rates prescribed under section 115BAC of the Income-tax Act for default tax 
regime 
Section 115BAC of the Income-tax Act, 1961 provides for concessional rates of tax 
to individuals/HUF/AoPs/BoIs and artificial juridical persons. Under this regime 
certain exemptions/deductions are, however, not available like Leave Travel 
Concession, interest on housing loan on self-occupied property, deductions under 
Chapter VI-A [other than section 80CCD(2), 80CCH(2) or section 80JJAA] etc. The 
rates given under section 115BAC are the default tax rates unless the assessee 
exercises an option to shift out of the said regime. The basic exemption limit under 
section 115BAC is ` 3,00,000. This means that no tax is payable by an assessee with 
total income of upto ` 3,00,000. The tax rates under section 115BAC is as follows - 
S. 
No. 
Total Income 
Rate of tax 
1. 
Upto ` 3,00,000 
Nil 
2. 
From ` 3,00,000 to ` 6,00,000 
5% 
3. 
From ` 6,00,000 to ` 9,00,000 
10% 
4. 
From ` 9,00,000 to ` 12,00,000 
15% 
5. 
From ` 12,00,000 to ` 15,00,000 
20% 
6. 
Above ` 15,00,000 
30% 
Rates prescribed by the Annual Finance Act under the optional tax regime 
Individuals/HUF/AoPs/BoIs and artificial juridical persons, who exercise the option to 
opt out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC, have to pay tax as per normal 
provisions of the Act. Under the normal provisions of the Act, the rates of tax are 
prescribed by the Annual Finance Act of the year.  
For individuals, HUF etc., the basic exemption limit is ` 2,50,000. This means that, as 
per the normal provisions of the Act, no tax is payable by individuals with total 
income of upto ` 2,50,000. Those individuals whose total income is more than 
` 2,50,000 but less than ` 5,00,000 have to pay tax on their total income in excess of 
` 2,50,000@5%. Total income between ` 5,00,000 and ` 10,00,000 attracts tax 
@20%. The highest rate is 30%, which is attracted in respect of income in excess of  
` 10,00,000. The tax rates have to be applied on the total income to arrive at the 
income-tax liability.  

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.18 
However, resident individuals enjoy rebate under section 87A in both the tax regimes 
which are discussed later on in this chapter. 
For certain income (like Long Term Capital Gains, Lottery Income, Specified Short 
Term Capital Gains etc.), slab rates are not applicable under both the tax regimes. 
These incomes are taxable at special rates of taxation under both the tax regimes. 
These special rates are contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961 itself. 
Step 10 - Surcharge / Rebate under section 87A 
Surcharge: Surcharge is an additional tax payable over and above the income-tax. 
Surcharge is levied as a percentage of income-tax, where total income exceeds  
` 50 lakhs. The rates of surcharge applicable for different slabs of total income are 
discussed later on in this chapter.  
Rebate under section 87A: In order to provide tax relief to the individual tax payers, 
section 87A provides a rebate from the tax payable by an assessee, being an 
individual resident in India, whose total income does not exceed ` 7,00,000 under 
the default tax regime under section 115BAC or ` 5,00,000 under the normal 
provisions of the Act if he opts out of the default tax regime. Under the default tax 
regime, an individual whose total income exceeds ` 7 lakhs marginally is also entitled 
to a rebate of the difference between tax on total income and the amount by which 
the total income exceeds ` 7 lakhs, when the former is greater than the latter. 
Step 11 – Health and education cess on income-tax 
The income-tax, as increased by the surcharge or as reduced by the rebate under 
section 87A, if applicable, is to be further increased by an additional surcharge 
called health and education cess on income-tax @4% of income-tax plus surcharge, 
if applicable. 
Step 12 – Alternate Minimum Tax (AMT) 
The Income-tax Act, 1961 contains certain profit-linked and investment linked 
deductions under normal provisions of the Act to promote investment in various 
sectors. These tax benefits help to reduce the tax liability of the taxpayers who 
exercise the option to opt out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC and 
become eligible to claim such deductions. In order to preserve the tax base vis-a-
vis profit linked and investment linked deductions, the Income-tax Act, 1961 
provides for levy of alternate minimum tax. Section 115JC provides for minimum 
tax to be paid by the taxpayers on their total income without providing profit linked 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.19 
and investment linked deductions. However, the taxpayer can claim the tax credit 
of the excess tax paid over the regular income-tax payable.  
Individuals/HUF/AoPs/BoIs and artificial juridical persons paying tax under default 
tax regime under section 115BAC, are not liable to alternate minimum tax under 
section 115JC. 
For detailed discussion, refer to Chapter 9: Income-tax liability – Computation and 
Optimisation. 
Step 13 – Examine whether to pay tax under the default tax regime under 
section 115BAC or pay tax under the optional tax regime as per the regular 
provisions of the Act 
Total income and tax liability of individuals/HUF/AoPs/BoIs and artificial juridical 
persons may be computed in accordance with both the default tax regime under 
section 115BAC and as per the regular provisions of the Act including provisions 
relating to AMT, if applicable. Then, such persons can determine which is more 
beneficial and accordingly decide whether or not to opt out of the default tax regime 
under section 115BAC. 
Individuals/HUF/AoPs/BoIs not having income from business or profession can 
choose whether or not to exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime 
in each previous year. They may choose to pay tax under default tax regime under 
section 115BAC in one year and exercise the option to shift out of default tax regime 
in another year. 
Step 14 – Advance tax and tax deducted/ collected at source 
Although the tax liability of an assessee is determined only at the end of the year, 
tax is required to be paid in advance in four installments on the basis of estimated 
income i.e., on or before 15th June, 15th September, 15th December and 15th March. 
However, residents declaring profits under presumptive taxation scheme (where 
business income is computed as a percentage of gross receipts/turnover) can pay 
advance tax in one installment on or before 15th March instead of four installments. 
In certain cases, tax is required to be deducted at source from the income by the 
payer at the rates prescribed in the Income-tax Act, 1961 or the Annual Finance 
Act. Such deduction should be made either at the time of accrual or at the time of 
payment, as prescribed by the Act.   
Example: In the case of salary income, the obligation of the employer to deduct 
tax at source arises only at the time of payment of salary to the employees. 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.20 
However, in respect of other payments like, fees for professional services, fees for 
technical services, interest payable to residents, the person responsible for paying 
is liable to deduct tax at source at the time of credit of such income to the account 
of the payee or at the time of payment, whichever is earlier. Such tax deducted at 
source has to be remitted to the credit of the Central Government through any 
branch of the RBI, SBI or any authorized bank within the statutory due dates. 
For detailed discussion, refer to Chapter 7: Advance tax, tax deduction at source and 
tax collection at source.   
Step 15: Tax Payable/Tax Refundable 
After adjusting the advance tax and tax deducted/ collected at source, the assessee 
would arrive at the amount of net tax payable or refundable. Such amount should 
be rounded off to the nearest multiple of ` 10 as per section 288B. 
The assessee has to pay the amount of tax payable (called self-assessment tax) on 
or before the due date of filing of the return. Similarly, if any refund is due, assessee 
will get the same after filing the return of income. 
(2) 
Return of Income  
The Income-tax Act, 1961 contains provisions for filing of return of income. Return 
of income is the format in which the assessee furnishes information as to his total 
income and tax payable. The format for filing of returns by different assessees is 
notified by the CBDT. The particulars of income earned under different heads, gross 
total income, deductions from gross total income, total income and tax payable by 
the assessee are required to be furnished in the return of income. In short, a return 
of income is the declaration of income by the assessee in the prescribed format.  
The Act has prescribed due dates for filing return of income in case of different 
assessees. Companies and firms have to mandatorily file their return of income 
before the due date. Other assessees are required to file a return of income subject 
to fulfilling of certain conditions. 
3. IMPORTANT DEFINITIONS 
In order to understand the provisions of the Act, one must have a thorough 
knowledge of the meanings of certain key terms like ‘person’, ‘assessee’, ‘income’, 
etc. To understand the meanings of these terms we have to first check whether they 
are defined in the Act. 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.21 
Terms defined in the Act: Section 2 gives definitions of the various terms and 
expressions used therein. If a particular definition is given in the Act itself, we have 
to be guided by that definition. For e.g. the term ‘perquisite’ has been defined 
under section 17(2) for the purpose of taxation of salaries. 
Terms not defined under the Act: If a particular definition is not given in the Act, 
reference can be made to the General Clauses Act or dictionaries.  
Students should note this point carefully because certain terms like “dividend”, 
“transfer”, etc. have been given a wider meaning in the Income-tax Act, 1961 than 
they are commonly understood. Some of the important terms defined under 
section 2 are given below: 
3.1 Assessee [Section 2(7)] 
“Assessee” means a person by whom any tax or any other sum of money is payable 
under this Act. In addition, it includes – 
• 
Every person in respect of whom any proceeding under this Act has been 
taken for the assessment of  
▪ 
his income; or 
▪ 
the income of any other person in respect of which he is assessable; or 
▪ 
the loss sustained by him or by such other person; or 
▪ 
the amount of refund due to him or to such other person. 
• 
Every person who is deemed to be an assessee under any provision of this 
Act; 
• 
Every person who is deemed to be an assessee-in-default under any provision 
of this Act. 
• 
Every assessee is a ‘person’, but every ‘person’ need not be an assessee. 
3.2 Assessment [Section 2(8)] 
This is the procedure by which the income of an assessee is determined. It may be 
by way of a normal assessment or by way of reassessment of an income previously 
assessed. Assessment Procedure will be dealt with in detail at the Final level.  

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.22 
3.3  Person [Section 2(31)] 
The definition of ‘assessee’ leads us to the definition of ‘person’ as the former is 
closely connected with the latter. The term ‘person’ is important from another point 
of view also viz., the charge of income-tax is on every ‘person’. 
 
We may briefly consider some of the above seven categories of persons each of 
which constitute a separate unit of assessment or a separate tax entity. 
(i) 
Individual 
The term ‘individual’ means only a natural person, i.e., a human being.  
• 
It includes both males and females.  
• 
It also includes a minor or a person of unsound mind. But the assessment in 
such a case may be made1 on the guardian or manager of the minor or lunatic 
who is entitled to receive his income. In the case of deceased person, 
assessment would be made on the legal representative. 
(ii) 
HUF 
Under the Income-tax Act, 1961, a Hindu undivided family (HUF) is treated as a 
separate entity for the purpose of assessment. It is included in the definition of the 
 
1 under section 161(1) 
Person
Individual
HUF
Company
Firm
AOP/BOI
Local 
Authority
Artificial 
juridical 
person

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.23 
term “person” under section 2(31). The levy of income-tax is on “every person”. 
Therefore, income-tax is payable by a HUF.  
"Hindu undivided family" has not been defined under the Income-tax Act. The 
expression is, however, defined under the Hindu Law as a family, which consists of 
all males lineally descended from a common ancestor and includes their wives and 
daughters.  
Some members of the HUF are called co-parceners. They are related to each other 
and to the head of the family. HUF may contain many members, but members 
within four degrees including the head of the family (Karta) are called co-parceners. 
A Hindu Coparcenary includes those persons who acquire an interest in joint family 
property by birth. Earlier, only male descendants were considered as coparceners. 
With effect from 6th September, 2005, daughters have also been accorded 
coparcenary status. It may be noted that only the coparceners have a right to 
partition.  
A daughter of coparcener by birth shall become a coparcener in her own right in 
the same manner as the son. Being a coparcener, she can claim partition of assets 
of the family. The rights of a daughter in coparcenary property are equal to that of 
a son. However, other female members of the family, for example, wife or daughter-
in-law of a coparcener are not eligible for such coparcenary rights.  
The relation of a HUF does not arise from a contract but arises from status. There 
need not be more than one male member or one female coparcener w.e.f.  
6th September, 2005 to form a HUF. The Income-tax Act, 1961 also does not indicate 
that a HUF as an assessable entity must consist of at least two male members or 
two coparceners. 
Under the Income-tax Act, 1961, Jain undivided families and Sikh undivided families 
would also be assessed as a HUF. 
 
Schools of Hindu Law
Dayabaga school
West Bengal and Assam
Mitakshara school
Rest of India except West 
Bengal and Assam

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.24 
The basic difference between the two schools of Hindu law with regard to 
succession is as follows:  
Dayabaga school of Hindu law 
Mitakshara school of Hindu law 
Prevalent in West Bengal and Assam 
Prevalent in rest of India 
Nobody acquires the right, share in the 
property by birth as long as the head of 
family is living.  
Thus, the children do not acquire any 
right, share in the family property, as 
long as his father is alive and only on 
death of the father, the children will 
acquire right/share in the property. 
Hence, the father and his brothers would 
be the coparceners of the HUF. 
One acquires the right to the family 
property by his birth and not by 
succession irrespective of the fact 
that his elders are living. 
Thus, every child born in the family 
acquires a right/share in the family 
property. 
(iii) Company [Section 2(17)] 
For all purposes of the Act, the term ‘Company’, has a much wider connotation than 
that under the Companies Act. Under the Act, the expression ‘Company’ means: 
(1) 
any Indian company as defined in section 2(26); or 
(2) 
any body corporate incorporated by or under the laws of a country outside 
India, i.e., any foreign company; or 
(3) 
any institution, association or body which is assessable or was assessed as a 
company for any assessment year under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 or for 
any assessment year commencing on or before 1.4.1970 under the present Act; or 
(4) 
any institution, association or body, whether incorporated or not and whether 
Indian or non-Indian, which is declared by a general or special order of the 
CBDT to be a company for such assessment years as may be specified in the 
CBDT’s order. 
Classes of Companies 
(1) 
Domestic company [Section 2(22A)] - It means an Indian company or any 
other company which, in respect of its income liable to income-tax, has made 
the prescribed arrangements for the declaration and payment of dividends 
(including dividends on preference shares) within India, payable out of such 
income. 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.25 
Indian company [Section 2(26)] - Two conditions should be satisfied so that 
a company can be regarded as an Indian company -  
(a) 
the company should have been formed and registered under the 
Companies Act, 19562 and 
(b) 
the registered office or the principal office of the company should be in India.  
 
The expression ‘Indian Company’ also includes the following provided their 
registered or principal office is in India:  
(i) 
a corporation established by or under a Central, State or Provincial Act 
(like Financial Corporation or a State Road Transport Corporation); 
(ii) 
an institution or association or body which is declared by the Board to 
be a company under section 2(17)(iv); 
(iii) 
a company formed and registered under any law relating to companies 
which was or is in force in any part of India [other than Jammu and 
Kashmir and Union territories mentioned in sub-clause (v) below]; 
(iv) 
in the case of Jammu and Kashmir, a company formed and registered 
under any law for the time being in force in Jammu and Kashmir; 
(v) 
in the case of any of the Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli, 
Daman and Diu, and Pondicherry or State of Goa, a company formed 
and registered under any law for the time being in force in that Union 
territory or State, respectively. 
(2) 
Foreign company [Section 2(23A)] - Foreign company means a company 
which is not a domestic company 
 
 
2 Now Companies Act, 2013 
Classes of companies
Domestic company 
Indian 
company 
Company which has made 
arrangement for declaring and 
paying dividend within India 
out of the income chargeable 
to tax in India.
Foreign company
A company which 
is not a domestic 
company

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.26 
(iv) Firm [Section 2(23)] 
The terms ‘firm’, ‘partner’ and ‘partnership’ have the same meanings as assigned to 
them in the Indian Partnership Act, 1932. In addition, the definitions also include 
the terms limited liability partnership and a partner of limited liability partnership 
as they have been defined in the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008.  
In an LLP, since liability of the partners is limited to their agreed contribution 
therein, it contains elements of both a corporate structure as well as a partnership 
firm structure. 
However, for income-tax purposes a minor admitted to the benefits of an existing 
partnership would also be treated as partner.  
 
 
A partnership is the relation between persons who have agreed to share 
the profits of business carried on by all or any of them acting for all. The 
persons who have entered into partnership with one another are called 
individually ‘partners’ and collectively a ‘firm’. 
(v) 
Association of Persons (AOP) 
When persons combine together for promotion of joint enterprise they are 
assessable as an AOP, if they do not in law constitute a partnership. In order to 
constitute an association, persons must join for a common purpose or action and 
their object must be to produce income; it is not enough that the persons receive 
the income jointly. Co-heirs, co-legatees or co-donees joining together for a 
common purpose or action would be chargeable as an AOP. For e.g., Mr. Yash, AB 
& Co. (Firm) and X (P) Ltd. join together to carry on construction activity otherwise 
than as a partnership firm, such an association will be recognized as an association 
of persons. 
Firm
As defined 
under the 
Partnership 
Act, 1932
As defined 
under the 
Limited 
Liability 
Partnership 
Act, 2008

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.27 
(vi) Body of Individuals (BOI) 
It denotes the status of persons like executors or trustees who merely receive the 
income jointly and who may be assessable in like manner and to the same extent 
as the beneficiaries individually. Thus, co-executors or co-trustees are assessable 
as a BOI as their title and interest are indivisible. Income-tax shall not be payable 
by an assessee in respect of the receipt of share of income by him from BOI and on 
which the tax has already been paid by such BOI. For e.g., mutual trade associations, 
members club, etc. 
Section 2(31) further explains that an association of persons or a body of individuals 
shall be treated as a person, whether or not it  was formed with the object of 
deriving income, profits or gains.  Accordingly, even if such entities have been 
formed not for earning any income/ profit still they are "person" for the purpose of 
the Act and are covered by the provisions of the Act.  
Difference between AOP and BOI: 
In case of a BOI, only individuals can be the members, whereas in case of AOP, any 
person can be its member i.e. entities like company, firm etc. can be the member 
of AOP but not of BOI.  
In case of an AOP, members voluntarily come together with a common will for a 
common intention or purpose, whereas in case of BOI, such common will may or 
may not be present. 
(vii) Local Authority 
The term “Local Authority” means a municipal committee, district board, body of 
port commissioners or other authority legally entitled to or entrusted by the 
Government with the control or management of a municipal or local fund. 
Note: A local authority is taxable in respect of that part of its income which arises 
from any business carried on by it in so far as that income does not arise from the 
supply of a commodity or service within its own jurisdictional area. However, 
income arising from the supply of water and electricity even outside the local 
authority’s own jurisdictional area is exempt from tax. 
 
 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.28 
(viii) Artificial Juridical Persons 
Artificial Juridical Persons are the entities which are not natural persons but are 
separate entities in the eyes of law. This is a residual category could cover all 
artificial persons with a juristic personality not falling under any other category of 
persons. Deities, Bar Council, Universities are some important examples of Artificial 
Juridical Persons.  
3.4 Income [Section 2(24)] 
(1) 
Definition of Income 
The definition of income as per the Income-tax Act, 1961 begins with the words 
“Income includes”. Therefore, it is an inclusive definition and not an exhaustive one.  
Such a definition does not confine the scope of income but leaves room for more 
inclusions within the ambit of the term.   
Section 2(24) of the Act gives a statutory definition of income. The following items 
of receipts are specifically included in the said definition:— 
(1) 
Profits and gains; 
(2) 
Dividends; 
(3) 
Voluntary contributions received by a trust/institution created wholly or 
partly for charitable or religious purposes or by certain research association 
or universities and other educational institutions or hospitals and other 
medical institutions or an electoral trust; 
(4) 
The value of any perquisite or profit in lieu of salary taxable under section 
17(2)/(3); 
(5) 
Any special allowance or benefit, other than the perquisite included above, 
specifically granted to the assessee to meet expenses wholly, necessarily and 
exclusively for the performance of the duties of an office or employment of 
profit; 
(6) 
Any allowance granted to the assessee to meet his personal expenses at the 
place where the duties of his office or employment of profit are ordinarily 
performed by him or at a place where he ordinarily resides or to compensate 
him for the increased cost of living; 
(7) 
The value of any benefit or perquisite whether convertible into money or not, 
obtained from a company either by a director or by a person who has a 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.29 
substantial interest in the company or by a relative of the director or such 
person and any sum paid by any such company in respect of any obligation 
which, but for such payment, would have been payable by the director or 
other person aforesaid; 
(8) 
The value of any benefit or perquisite, whether convertible into money or not, 
which is obtained by any representative assessee3 or by any beneficiary and 
any amount paid by the representative assessee for the benefit of the 
beneficiary which the beneficiary would have ordinarily been required to pay. 
(9) 
Profits and gains of business or profession chargeable to tax under section 
28(ii)/(iii)/(iiia)/(iiib)/(iiic)/(v)/(va); 
(10) Deemed profits chargeable to tax under section 41 or section 59; 
(11) The value of any benefit or perquisite taxable under section 28(iv); 
(12) Any capital gains chargeable under section 45; 
(13) Any winnings from lotteries, crossword puzzles, races including horse races, 
card games and other games of any sort or from gambling, or betting of any 
form or nature whatsoever. For this purpose, 
(i) 
“Lottery” includes winnings from prizes awarded to any person by draw 
of lots or by chance or in any other manner whatsoever, under any 
scheme or arrangement by whatever name called; 
(ii) 
“Card game and other game of any sort” includes any game show, an 
entertainment programme on television or electronic mode, in which 
people compete to win prizes or any other similar game; 
(14) Any sum received by the assessee from his employees as contributions to any 
provident fund (PF) or superannuation fund or Employees State Insurance 
Fund (ESI) or any other fund for the welfare of such employees; 
(15) Any sum received under a Keyman insurance policy including the sum 
allocated by way of bonus on such policy will constitute income; 
 
“Keyman insurance policy” means a life insurance policy taken by a person on 
the life of another person where the latter is or was an employee of former 
or is or was connected in any manner whatsoever with the former’s business. 
 
3 mentioned in section 160(1)(iii)/(iv) 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.30 
It also includes such policy which has been assigned to a person with or 
without any consideration, at any time during the term of the policy. 
(16) Fair market value of inventory as on the date of its conversion into or 
treatment as a capital asset under section 28(va); 
(17) Any consideration received for issue of shares as exceeds the fair market value 
of the shares [Section 56(2)(viib)]; 
(18) Any sum of money received as advance, if such sum is forfeited consequent 
to failure of negotiation for transfer of a capital asset [Section 56(2)(ix)]; 
(19) Any sum of money or value of property received without consideration or for 
inadequate consideration by any person [Section 56(2)(x)]; 
(20) Any compensation or other payment, due to or received by any person, in 
connection with termination of his employment or the modification of the 
term and conditions relating thereto [Section 56(2)(xi)]; 
(21) Sum received, including the amount allocated by way of bonus, under a LIP 
other than under a ULIP and keyman insurance policy, which is not exempt u/s 
10(10D), to the extent the same exceeds the aggregate of the premium paid 
during the term of the policy, and not claimed as deduction under any other 
provision of the Act [Section 56(2)(xiii)];  
[For details, refer to Unit 5 of Chapter 3: Income from Other Sources] 
(22) Assistance in the form of a subsidy or grant or cash incentive or duty 
drawback or waiver or concession or reimbursement, by whatever name 
called, by the Central Government or a State Government or any authority or 
body or agency in cash or kind to the assessee is included in the definition of 
income. 
 
However, subsidy or grant or reimbursement which has been taken into 
account for determination of the actual cost of the depreciable asset in 
accordance with Explanation 10 to section 43(1) shall not be included in the 
definition of income. 
(2) 
Concept of Income under the Income-tax Act, 1961 
➢ 
Regular receipt vis-a-vis casual receipt: Income, in general, means a 
periodic monetary return which accrues or is expected to accrue regularly 
from definite sources. However, under the Income-tax Act, 1961, even certain 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.31 
casual receipts which do not arise regularly are treated as income for tax 
purposes e.g. Winnings from lotteries, crossword puzzles. 
➢ 
Revenue receipt vis-a-vis Capital receipt: Income normally refers to 
revenue receipts. Capital receipts are generally not included within the scope 
of income in general parlance. However, the Income-tax Act, 1961 has 
specifically included certain capital receipts within the definition of income 
e.g., Capital gains i.e., gains on sale of a capital assets like land, jewellery. 
➢ 
Net receipt vis-a-vis Gross receipt: Income means net receipts and not 
gross receipts. Net receipts are arrived at after deducting the expenditure 
incurred in connection with earning such receipts. The expenditure which can 
be deducted while computing income under each head is prescribed under 
the Income-tax Act, 1961. Income from certain eligible businesses/ 
professions is also determined on presumptive basis i.e., as a certain 
percentage of gross receipts. [We will discuss in detail in Unit 3 of Chapter 3: 
Profits and gains of business or profession]. 
➢ 
Due basis vis-a-vis receipt basis: Income is taxable either on due basis or 
receipt basis. For computing income under the heads “Profits and gains of 
business or profession” and “Income from other sources”, the method of 
accounting regularly employed by the assessee should be considered, which 
can be either cash system or mercantile system. Some receipts are taxable 
only on receipt basis, like, income by way of interest received on 
compensation or enhanced compensation. 
➢ 
Application of Income vis-a-vis Diversion of Income: Application of 
income means to discharge an obligation (which is gratuitous or self-
imposed) after such income reaches the assessee.  Where by virtue of an 
obligation by overriding title, income is diverted before it reaches the 
assessee, it is known as diversion of income. In case of the former, the income 
would be taxable in the hands of the person who applies it, whereas in the 
case of the latter, it is not taxable (i.e., even if the assessee were to collect the 
income he does so on behalf of the person to whom it is payable). 
(3) 
Concept of revenue and capital receipts 
Students should carefully study the various items of receipts included in the 
definition of income. Some of them like capital gains are not revenue receipts. 
However, since they have been included in the definition, they are chargeable as 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.32 
income under the Act. The concept of revenue and capital receipts is discussed 
hereunder - 
The Act contemplates a levy of tax on income and not on capital and hence it is 
very essential to distinguish between capital and revenue receipts. Capital receipts 
cannot be taxed, unless they fall within the scope of the definition of “income” and 
so the distinction between capital and revenue receipts is material for tax purposes. 
Certain capital receipts which have been specifically included in the definition of 
income are compensation for modification or termination of services, income by 
way of capital gains etc. 
It is not possible to lay down any single test as infallible or any single criterion as 
decisive, final and universal in application to determine whether a particular receipt 
is capital or revenue in nature.  Hence, the capital or revenue nature of the receipt 
must be determined with reference to the facts and circumstances of each case. 
Criteria for determining whether a receipt is capital or revenue in nature 
The following are some of the important criteria which may be applied to 
distinguish between capital and revenue receipts. 
Fixed capital or Circulating capital: A receipt referable to fixed capital would be 
a capital receipt whereas a receipt referable to circulating capital would be a 
revenue receipt. The former is not taxable while the latter is taxable. Tangible and 
intangible assets which the owner keeps in his possession for making profits are in 
the nature of fixed capital. The circulating capital is one which is turned over and 
yields income or loss in the process. 
Income from transfer of capital asset or trading asset: Profits arising from the 
sale of a capital asset are chargeable to tax as capital gains under section 45 
whereas profits arising from the sale of a trading asset being of revenue nature are 
taxable as income from business under section 28 provided that the sale is in the 
regular course of assessee’s business or the transaction constitutes an adventure 
in the nature of trade.  
Capital Receipts vis-a-vis Revenue Receipts: Tests to be applied 
(1) 
Transaction entered into the course of business: Profits arising from 
transactions which are entered into in the course of the business regularly 
carried on by the assessee, or are incidental to, or associated with the 
business of the assessee would be revenue receipts chargeable to tax.  

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.33 
 
Example:  A banker’s or financier’s dealings in foreign exchange or sale of 
shares and securities, a shipbroker’s purchase of ship in his own name, a share 
broker’s purchase of shares on his own account would constitute transactions 
entered and yielding income in the ordinary course of their business. Whereas 
building and land would constitute capital assets in the hands of a trader in 
shares, the same would constitute stock-in-trade in the hands of a property 
dealer. 
(2) 
Profit arising from sale of shares and securities: In the case of profit arising 
from the sale of shares and securities, the nature of the profit has to be 
ascertained from the motive, intention or purpose with which they were bought. 
If the shares were acquired as an investor or with a view to acquiring a controlling 
interest or for obtaining a managing or selling agency or a directorship, the profit 
or loss on their sale would be of a capital nature; but if the shares were acquired 
in the ordinary course of business as a dealer in shares, it would constitute his 
stock-in-trade. If the shares were acquired with speculative motive, the profit or 
loss (although of a revenue nature) would have to be dealt with separately from 
the profit or loss of other businesses. 
Securities held by Foreign Institutional Investor which has invested 
in such securities in accordance with the regulations made under 
the SEBI Act, 1992 would be treated as a capital asset. Even if the 
nature of such security in the hands of the Foreign Portfolio Investor is stock-
in-trade, the same would be treated as a capital asset and the profit on transfer 
would be taxable as capital gains.  
(3) 
A single transaction - Can it constitute business?  Even a single transaction 
may constitute a business or an adventure in the nature of trade even if it is 
outside the normal course of the assessee’s business. Repetition of such 
transactions is not necessary. Thus, a bulk purchase followed by a bulk sale 
or a series of retail sales or bulk sale followed by a series of retail purchases 
would constitute an adventure in the nature of trade and consequently, the 
income arising therefrom would be taxable. Purchase of any article with no 
intention to resell it, but resold under changed circumstances would be a 
transaction of a capital nature and capital gains would arise. However, where 
an asset is purchased with the intention to resell it, the question whether the 
profit on sale is capital or revenue in nature depends upon (i) the conduct of 
the assessee, (ii) the nature and quantity of the article purchased, (iii) the 
nature of the operations involved, (iv) whether the venture is on capital or 
revenue account, and (v) other related circumstances of the case. 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.34 
(4) 
Liquidated damages: Receipt of liquidated damages directly and intimately 
linked with the procurement of a capital asset, which lead to delay in coming 
into existence of the profit-making apparatus, is a capital receipt. The amount 
received by the assessee towards compensation for sterilization of the profit 
earning source is not in the ordinary course of business. Hence, it is a capital 
receipt in the hands of the assessee.  
(5) 
Compensation on termination of agency/service contract: Where an 
assessee receives compensation on termination of the agency business being 
the only source of income, the receipt is of capital nature, but taxable under 
section 28(ii)(c). However, where the assessee has a number of agencies and 
one of them is terminated and compensation is received therefor, the receipt 
would be of a revenue nature since taking up an agency and exploiting the 
same for earning income is in the ordinary course of business. The loss of one 
agency would be made good by profit from another agency. Compensation 
received from the employer or from any person for premature termination of 
the service contract is a capital receipt, but is taxable as profit in lieu of salary 
under section 17(3) or as income from other sources under section 56(2)(xi), 
respectively. Compensation received or receivable in connection with the 
termination or the modification of the terms and conditions of any contract 
relating to its business shall be taxable as business income. 
(6) 
Gifts: Normally, gifts constitute a capital receipt in the hands of the recipient. 
However, certain gifts are brought within the purview of income-tax, for 
example, receipt of property without consideration is brought to tax under 
section 56(2)(x). 
 
For example, any sum of money or value of property received without 
consideration or for inadequate consideration by any person, other than a 
relative, is chargeable under the head “Income from Other Sources” [For 
details, refer to Unit - 5 of Chapter 3 :Income from Other Sources]. 
3.5 India [Section 2(25A)] 
The term 'India' means – 
(i) 
the territory of India as per Article 1 of the Constitution,  
(ii) 
its territorial waters, seabed and subsoil underlying such waters,  
(iii) 
continental shelf,  
(iv) 
exclusive economic zone or  

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.35 
(v) 
any other specified maritime zone and the air space above its territory and 
territorial waters. 
Specified maritime zone means the maritime zone as referred to in the Territorial 
Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 
1976. 
3.6 Agricultural income [Section 2(1A)] 
Agricultural income definition is very wide and covers the income of not only the 
cultivators but also the land holders who might have rented out the lands. 
Agricultural income may be received in cash or in kind. 
Agricultural income may arise in any one of the following three ways:- 
(1) 
It may be rent or revenue derived from land situated in India and used for 
agricultural purposes. 
(2) 
It may be income derived from such land by 
(a) 
agriculture or  
(b) 
the performance of a process ordinarily employed by a cultivator or 
receiver of rent in kind to render the produce fit to be taken to the 
market or  
(c) 
the sale, by a cultivator or receiver of rent in kind, of such agricultural 
produce raised or received by him,  in respect of which no process 
has been performed other than a process of the nature mentioned in 
point (b) above. 
(3) 
Lastly, agricultural income may be derived from any farm building required 
for agricultural operations. 
Now let us take a critical look at the following aspects: 
(1)  Rent or revenue derived from land situated in India and used for 
agricultural purposes: The following three conditions have to be satisfied 
for income to be treated as agricultural income: 
(a)  
Rent or revenue should be derived from land; 
(b) 
land has to be situated in India (If agricultural land is situated in a 
foreign country, the entire income would be taxable); and 
(c)  
land should be used for agricultural purposes. 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.36 
 
The amount received in money or in kind, by one person from another for 
right to use land is termed as Rent. The rent can either be received by the 
owner of the land or by the original tenant from the sub-tenant. It implies 
that ownership of land is not necessary. Thus, the rent received by the original 
tenant from sub-tenant would also be agricultural income subject to the other 
conditions mentioned above. 
 
The scope of the term “Revenue” is much broader than rent. It includes 
income other than rent. For example, fees received for renewal for grant of 
land on lease would be revenue derived from land. 
(2) 
Income derived from such land by 
(a)  Agriculture 
The term “Agriculture” has not been defined in the Act. However, 
cultivation of a field involving human skill and labour on the land can 
be broadly termed as agriculture. 
 
“Agriculture” means tilling of the land, sowing of the seeds and similar 
operations. It involves basic operations and subsequent operations. 
 
Note: The term ‘agriculture’ cannot be extended to all activities which 
have some distant relation to land like dairy farming, breeding and 
rearing of live stock, butter and cheese making and poultry farming. 
This aspect is discussed in detail later on in this chapter. 
 
Those operations
by
agriculturists
which
are
absolutely
necessary for the
purpose
of
effectively raising
produce from the
land
are
the
basic operations.
Basic 
Operations
Operations
to
be
performed
after
the
produce sprouts from
the
land
(e.g.,
weeding, digging etc.)
are subsequent opera-
tions.
These
subsequent operations
would be agricultural
operations only when
taken
in
conjunction
with
and
as
a
continuation
of
the
basic operations.
Subsequent 
Operations

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.37 
 
Whether income from nursery constitutes agricultural 
income? 
Yes, as per Explanation 3 to section 2(1A), income derived from 
saplings or seedlings grown in a nursery would be deemed to be agricultural 
income, whether or not the basic operations were carried out on land.   
(b)  Process ordinarily employed to render the produce fit to be taken 
to the market: Sometimes, to make the agricultural produce a saleable 
commodity, it becomes necessary to perform some kind of process on 
the produce. The income from the process employed to render the 
produce fit to be taken to the market would be agricultural income. 
However, it must be a process ordinarily employed by the cultivator or 
receiver of rent in kind and the process must be applied to make the 
produce fit to be taken to the market. 
 
The ordinary process employed to render the produce fit to be taken to 
market includes thrashing, winnowing, cleaning, drying, crushing etc. 
For example, the process ordinarily employed by the cultivator to obtain 
the rice from paddy is to first remove the hay from the basic grain, and 
thereafter to remove the chaff from the grain. The grain has to be 
properly filtered to remove stones etc. and finally the rice has to be 
packed in gunny bags for sale in the market.  
 
After such process, the rice can be taken to the market for sale. This 
process of making the rice ready for the market may involve manual 
operations or mechanical operations. All these operations constitute 
the process ordinarily employed to make the product fit for the market. 
The produce must retain its original character in spite of the processing 
unless there is no market for selling it in that condition. 
 
However, if marketing process is performed on a produce which can be 
sold in its raw form, income derived therefrom is partly agricultural 
income and partly business income. 
(c)  Sale of such agricultural produce in the market: Any income from the 
sale of any produce to the cultivator or receiver of rent-in kind is 
agricultural income provided it is from the land situated in India and 
used for agricultural purposes. However, if the produce is subjected to 
any process other than process ordinarily employed to make the 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.38 
produce fit for market, the income arising on sale of such produce 
would be partly agricultural income and partly non-agricultural income. 
Similarly, if other agricultural produce like tea, cotton, tobacco, 
sugarcane etc. are subjected to manufacturing process and the 
manufactured product is sold, the profit on such sale will consist of 
agricultural income as well as business income. That portion of the 
profit representing agricultural income will be exempted.  
 
Apportionment 
of 
Income 
between 
business 
income 
and 
agricultural income: Rules 7, 7A, 7B & 8 of Income-tax Rules, 1962 
provide the basis of apportionment of income between agricultural 
income and business income. 
(i) 
Rule 7 - Income from growing and manufacturing of any 
product - Where income is partially agricultural income and 
partially income chargeable to income-tax as business income, 
the market value of any agricultural produce which has been 
raised by the assessee or received by him as rent in kind and which 
has been utilised as raw material in such business or the sale 
receipts of which are included in the accounts of the business shall 
be deducted. No further deduction shall be made in respect of 
any expenditure incurred by the assessee as a cultivator or 
receiver of rent in kind. 
 
Determination of market value - There are two possibilities here: 
(I) 
The agricultural produce is capable of being sold in the market 
either in its raw stage or after application of any ordinary 
process to make it fit to be taken to the market. In such a case, 
the value calculated at the average price at which it has been so 
sold during the relevant previous year will be the market value. 
(II) 
It is possible that the agricultural produce is not capable of 
being ordinarily sold in the market in its raw form or after 
application of any ordinary process. In such case the market 
value will be the total of the following:— 
• 
The expenses of cultivation; 
• 
The land revenue or rent paid for the area in which 
it was grown; and 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.39 
• 
Such amount as the Assessing Officer finds having 
regard to the circumstances in each case to 
represent at reasonable profit. 
ILLUSTRATION 1 
Mr. B grows sugarcane and uses the same for the purpose of 
manufacturing sugar in his factory. 30% of sugarcane produce is sold 
for ` 10 lakhs, and the cost of cultivation of such sugarcane is  
` 5 lakhs. The cost of cultivation of the balance sugarcane (70%) is 
` 14 lakhs and the market value of the same is ` 22 lakhs. After 
incurring ` 1.5 lakhs in the manufacturing process on the balance 
sugarcane, the sugar was sold for ` 25 lakhs. Compute B’s business 
income and agricultural income. 
SOLUTION  
Computation of Business Income and Agriculture 
Income of Mr. B 
Particulars 
Business 
Income 
Agricultural Income 
(`) 
(`) 
(`) 
Sale of Sugar 
 
 
 
Business income 
 
 
 
Sale Proceeds of sugar 
25,00,000 
 
 
Less: Market value of sugar-
cane (70%) 
22,00,000 
 
 
Less: Manufacturing exp. 
  1,50,000 
 
 
 
1,50,000 
 
 
Agricultural income 
 
 
 
Market value of sugarcane 
(70%) 
 22,00,000 
 
Less: Cost of cultivation 
 14,00,000 
 
 
 
 
8,00,000 
 
 
  

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.40 
Sale of sugarcane 
 
Agricultural Income 
 
 
 
Sale proceeds of sugarcane 
(30%) 
 10,00,000 
 
Less: Cost of cultivation 
 
 5,00,000 
 
 
 
    5,00,000 
 
 
 13,00,000 
(ii) 
Rule 7A – Income from growing and manufacturing of rubber 
- This rule is applicable when income derived from the sale of 
centrifuged latex or cenex or latex based crepes or brown crepes 
or technically specified block rubbers manufactured or processed 
from field latex or coagulum obtained from rubber plants grown 
by the seller in India. In such cases, 35% profits on sale is taxable 
as business income under the head “Profits and gains from 
business or profession”, and the balance 65% is agricultural 
income which is exempt. 
ILLUSTRATION 2 
Mr. C manufactures latex from the rubber plants grown by him in 
India. These are then sold in the market for ` 30 lakhs. The cost of 
growing rubber plants is ` 10 lakhs and that of manufacturing latex 
is ` 8 lakhs. Compute his total income.  
SOLUTION 
The total income of Mr. C comprises of agricultural income and 
business income.  
Total profits from the sale of latex= ` 30 lakhs – ` 10 lakhs –  
` 8 lakhs= ` 12 lakhs. 
Agricultural income 
= 65% of ` 12 lakhs 
= ` 7.8 lakhs 
Business income  
= 35% of ` 12 lakhs 
= ` 4.2 lakhs 
(iii) Rule 7B – Income from growing and manufacturing of coffee 
a)  
In case of income derived from the sale of coffee grown and 
cured by the seller in India, 25% profits on sale is taxable as 
business income under the head “Profits and gains from 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.41 
business or profession”, and the balance 75% is agricultural 
income and is exempt.  
b)  
In case of income derived from the sale of coffee grown, cured, 
roasted and grounded by the seller in India, with or without 
mixing chicory or other flavoring ingredients, 40% profits on 
sale is taxable as business income under the head “Profits and 
gains from business or profession”, and the balance 60% is 
agricultural income and is exempt. 
(iv) Rule 8 - Income from growing and manufacturing of tea - This 
rule applies only in cases where the assessee himself grows tea 
leaves and manufactures tea in India. In such cases 40% profits on 
sale is taxable as business income under the head “Profits and 
gains from business or profession”, and the balance 60% is 
agricultural income and is exempt. 
Rule 
Apportionment of 
income in certain cases 
Agricultural 
Income 
Business 
Income 
7A 
Income from sale of rubber 
products 
derived 
from 
rubber plant grown by the 
seller in India. 
65% 
35% 
7B 
Income from sale of coffee  
 
 
 
- 
grown and cured by 
the seller in India 
75% 
25% 
 
- 
grown, cured, roasted 
and grounded by the 
seller in India 
60% 
40% 
8 
Income from sale of tea 
grown and manufactured 
by the seller in India  
60% 
40% 
(3) 
Income from farm building: Income from the farm building which is owned 
and occupied by the receiver of the rent or revenue of any such land or 
occupied by the cultivator or the receiver of rent in kind, of any land with 
respect to which, or the produce of which, any process discussed above is 
carried on, would be agricultural income.  

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.42 
 
However, the income arising from the use of such farm building for any 
purpose (including letting for residential purpose or for the purpose of 
business or profession) other than agriculture referred in (1) & (2) of para 3.6 
in page 1.35 would not be agricultural income.  
 
Further, the income from such farm building would be agricultural income 
only if the following conditions are satisfied: 
(a) 
The building should be on or in the immediate vicinity of the land; and 
(b) 
The receiver of the rent or revenue or the cultivator or the receiver of 
rent in kind should, by reason of his connection with such land require 
it as a dwelling house or as a store house. 
In addition to the above conditions any one of the following two conditions 
should also be satisfied: 
(i) 
The land should either be assessed to land revenue in India or be 
subject to a local rate assessed and collected by the officers of the 
Government as such or; 
(ii) 
Where the land is not so assessed to land revenue in India or is not 
subject to local rate:- 
a. 
It should not be situated in any area as comprised within the 
jurisdiction of a municipality or a cantonment board and which 
has a population not less than 10,000 or 
b. 
It should not be situated in any area within such distance, 
measured aerially, in relation to the range of population as shown 
hereunder – 
 
 
Shortest 
aerial 
distance from the local 
limits of a municipality 
or cantonment board 
referred to in item a. 
Population according to the 
last preceding census of which 
the relevant figures have been 
published before the first day 
of the previous year 
(i) 
≤ 2 kms 
> 10,000  
(ii) 
>2 kms but ≤ 6 kms 
> 1,00,000 
(iii) 
>6 kms but ≤ 8kms 
> 10,00,000 
 
 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.43 
Example: 
 
Area 
Shortest 
aerial 
distance 
from 
the local limits of 
a municipality or 
cantonment 
board referred to 
in item a. 
Population according 
to the last preceding 
census of which the 
relevant figures have 
been 
published 
before the first day of 
the previous year 
Would 
income 
derived from 
farm 
building 
situated 
in 
this area be 
treated 
as 
agricultural 
income? 
(i) 
A 
1 km 
9,000 
Yes 
(ii) 
B 
1.5 kms 
12,000 
No 
(iii) 
C 
2 kms 
11,00,000 
No 
(iv) 
D 
3 kms 
80,000 
Yes 
(v) 
E 
4 kms 
3,00,000 
No 
(v) 
F 
5 kms 
12,00,000 
No 
(vi) 
G 
6 kms 
8,000 
Yes 
(vii) 
H 
7 kms 
4,00,000 
Yes 
(viii) 
I 
8 kms 
10,50,000 
No 
(ix) 
J 
9 kms 
15,00,000 
Yes 
Would income arising from transfer of agricultural land situated in urban 
area be agricultural income? 
No, as per Explanation 1 to section 2(1A), the capital gains arising from the 
transfer of urban agricultural land would not be treated as agricultural income 
under section 10 but will be taxable under section 45.  
Example: Suppose A sells agricultural land situated in New Delhi for ` 10 lakhs and 
makes a surplus of ` 8 lakhs over its cost of acquisition. This surplus will not constitute 
agricultural income exempt under section 10(1) and will be taxable under section 45. 
 
Indirect connection with land 
We have seen above that agricultural income is exempt, whether it is received 
by the tiller or the landlord. However, non-agricultural income does not become 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.44 
agricultural merely on account of its indirect connection with the land. The 
following examples will illustrate the above point. 
Example: A rural society has as its principal business the selling on behalf of its 
member societies, butter made by these societies from cream sold to them by 
farmers. The making of butter was a factory process separated from the farm.  
The butter resulting from the factory operations separated from the farm was not an 
agricultural product and the society was, therefore, not entitled to exemption under 
section 10(1) in respect of such income. 
Example: X was the managing agent of a company. He was entitled for a 
commission at the rate of 10% p.a. on the annual net profits of the company. A part 
of the company’s income was agricultural income. X claimed that since his 
remuneration was calculated with reference to income of the company, part of 
which was agricultural income, such part of the commission as was proportionate 
to the agricultural income was exempt from income tax.  
Since, X received remuneration under a contract for personal service calculated on 
the amount of profits earned by the company; such remuneration does not constitute 
agricultural income.  
Example: Y owned 100 acres of agricultural land, a part of which was used as 
pasture for cows. The lands were purely maintained for manuring and other 
purposes connected with agriculture and only the surplus milk after satisfying the 
assessee’s needs was sold. The question arose whether income from such sale of 
milk was agricultural income.  
The regularity with which the sales of milk were effected and quantity of milk sold 
showed that the assessee carried on regular business of producing milk and selling it 
as a commercial proposition. Hence, it was not agricultural income.  
Example: In regard to forest trees of spontaneous growth which grow on the soil 
unaided by any human skill and labour there is no cultivation of the soil at all. Even 
though operations in the nature of forestry operations performed by the assessee 
may have the effect of nursing and fostering the growth of such forest trees, it 
cannot constitute agricultural operations.  
Income from the sale of such forest trees of spontaneous growth does not, therefore, 
constitute agricultural income.  
 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.45 
Examples of Agricultural income and Non-agricultural income 
For better understanding of the concept, certain examples of agricultural income 
and non-agricultural income are given below: 
Example: Agricultural income  
❖ 
 Income derived from saplings or seedlings grown in a nursery. 
❖ 
Income from growing of flowers and creepers. 
❖ 
Rent received from land used for grazing of cattle required for agricultural 
activities. 
❖ 
Income from growing of bamboo. 
Example: Non-agricultural income   
❖ 
Income from breeding of livestock. 
❖ 
Income from poultry farming. 
❖ 
Income from fisheries. 
❖ 
Income from dairy farming. 
4. PREVIOUS YEAR AND ASSESSMENT YEAR  
 
4.1 Assessment year 
The term has been defined under section 2(9). This means a period of 12 months 
commencing on 1st April every year. The year in which income is earned is the 
previous year and such income is taxable in the immediately following year which 
is the assessment year. Income earned in the previous year 2023-24 is taxable in 
the assessment year 2024-25. 
Assessment year always starts from 1st April and it is always a period of 12 months.  
 
 
Previous Year 2023-24
Assessment Year 2024-25

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.46 
4.2 Previous year 
The term has been defined under section 3. It means the financial year immediately 
preceding the assessment year. As mentioned earlier, the income earned during 
the previous year is taxable in the assessment year.  
Business or profession newly set up during the financial year - In such a case, 
the previous year shall be the period beginning on the date of setting up of the 
business or profession and ending with 31st March of the said financial year.  
If a source of income comes into existence in the said financial year, then, the 
previous year will commence from the date on which the source of income newly 
comes into existence and will end with 31st March of the financial year. 
Examples: 
A is running a business from 1993 onwards. Determine the previous year for the 
assessment year 2024-25. 
Ans. The previous year will be 1.4.2023 to 31.3.2024. 
A chartered accountant sets up his profession on 1st July, 2023. Determine the 
previous year for the assessment year 2024-25. 
Ans. The previous year will be from 1.7.2023 to 31.3.2024. 
4.3 Certain cases when income of a previous year will be 
assessed in the previous year itself 
 
General Rule
Income of a previous year is assessed in the assessment year following 
the previous year
Exceptions to this rule
Cases where income of a previous year is assessed in the previous year itself
Shipping 
business of 
non-resident
Persons 
leaving 
India
AOP/ BOI/ Artificial 
Juridical Person 
formed for a 
particular event or 
purpose
Persons likely 
to transfer 
property to 
avoid tax
Discontinued 
business

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.47 
The income of an assessee for a previous year is charged to income-tax in the 
assessment year following the previous year. For instance, income of previous year 
2023-24 is assessed during 2024-25. Therefore, 2024-25 is the assessment year for 
assessment of income of the previous year 2023-24. 
However, in a few cases, this rule does not apply and the income is taxed in the 
previous year in which it is earned. These exceptions have been made to protect 
the interests of revenue. The exceptions are as follows: 
(i) 
Shipping business of non-resident [Section 172] 
Where a ship, belonging to or chartered by a non-resident, carries passengers, 
livestock, mail or goods shipped at a port in India, the ship is allowed to leave the 
port only when the tax has been paid or satisfactory arrangement has been made 
for payment thereof. 7.5% of the freight paid or payable to the owner or the 
charterer or to any person on his behalf, whether in India or outside India on 
account of such carriage is deemed to be his income which is charged to tax in the 
same year in which it is earned. 
(ii) 
Persons leaving India [Section 174] 
Where it appears to the Assessing Officer that any individual may leave India during 
the current assessment year or shortly after its expiry and he has no present 
intention of returning to India, the total income of such individual for the period 
from the expiry of the respective previous year up to the probable date of his 
departure from India is chargeable to tax in that assessment year. 
Example: Suppose Mr. X is leaving India for USA on 10.6.2023 and it appears to the 
Assessing Officer that he has no intention to return. Before leaving India, Mr. X may 
be asked to pay income-tax on the income earned during the P.Y. 2022-23 as well as 
on the total income earned during the period 1.4.2023 to 10.06.2023. 
(iii) AOP/BOI/Artificial Juridical Person formed for a particular event or 
purpose [Section 174A] 
If an AOP/BOI etc. is formed or established for a particular event or purpose and 
the Assessing Officer apprehends that the AOP/BOI is likely to be dissolved in the 
same year or in the next year, he can make assessment of the income up to the 
date of dissolution as income of the relevant assessment year.  
 
 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.48 
(iv) Persons likely to transfer property to avoid tax [Section 175] 
During the current assessment year, if it appears to the Assessing Officer that a 
person is likely to charge, sell, transfer, dispose of or otherwise part with any of his 
assets to avoid payment of any liability under this Act, the total income of such 
person for the period from the expiry of the previous year to the date, when the 
Assessing Officer commences proceedings under this section is chargeable to tax 
in that assessment year. 
(v) 
Discontinued business [Section 176] 
Where any business or profession is discontinued in any assessment year, the 
income of the period from the expiry of the previous year up to the date of such 
discontinuance may, at the discretion of the Assessing Officer, be charged to tax in 
that assessment year. 
5. UNDISCLOSED SOURCES OF INCOME 
 
(i)  
Cash Credits [Section 68] 
Where any sum is found credited in the books of an assessee maintained for any 
previous year and the assessee offers no explanation about the nature and source 
or the explanation offered is not satisfactory in the opinion of the Assessing Officer, 
the sum so credited may be charged as income of the assessee of that previous 
year. 
Undisclosed 
sources of 
income
Amount 
borrowed or 
repaid on hundi 
[Section 69D]
Unexplained 
expenditure 
[Section 69C]
Investment etc. 
not fully 
disclosed 
[Section 69B]
Unexplained 
money 
[Section 69A]
Unexplained 
Investments 
[Section 69]
Cash 
Credits 
[Section 
68]

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.49 
Unexplained loan or borrowing - Where the sum so credited consists of loan or 
borrowing or any such amount, by whatever name called, any explanation offered by 
the assessee in whose books such sum is credited shall not be deemed to be 
satisfactory, unless - 
- 
the person in whose name such credit is recorded in the books of such assessee 
also offers an explanation about the nature and source of such sum so credited; 
and 
- 
such explanation in the opinion of the Assessing Officer has been found to be 
satisfactory. 
Unexplained Share Capital/ Premium- Any explanation offered by a closely held 
company in respect of any sum credited as share application money, share capital, 
share premium or any such amount, by whatever name called, in the accounts of 
such company shall be deemed to be not satisfactory, unless 
-  
the person, being a resident, in whose name such credit is recorded in the 
books of such company also explains about the nature and the source of such 
sum so credited and 
- 
such explanation in the opinion of the Assessing Officer has been found to 
be satisfactory 
Non-applicability to Venture Capital Fund or Venture Capital Company –These 
additional conditions would not apply if the person, in whose name the sum is 
recorded, is a Venture Capital Fund or Venture Capital Company registered with SEBI. 
(ii)  Unexplained Investments [Section 69] 
Where in the financial year immediately preceding the assessment year, the 
assessee has made investments which are not recorded in the books of account 
and the assessee offers no explanation about the nature and the source of 
investments or the explanation offered is not satisfactory in the opinion of the 
Assessing Officer, the value of the investments are taxed as deemed income of the 
assessee of such financial year. 
(iii) Unexplained money etc. [Section 69A] 
Where in any financial year the assessee is found to be the owner of any money, 
bullion, jewellery or other valuable article and the same is not recorded in the books 
of account and the assessee offers no explanation about the nature and source of 
acquisition of such money, bullion etc. or the explanation offered is not satisfactory 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.50 
in the opinion of the Assessing Officer, the money and the value of bullion etc. may 
be deemed to be the income of the assessee for such financial year.  
(iv) Amount of investments etc., not fully disclosed in the books of account 
[Section 69B] 
Where in any financial year the assessee has made investments or is found to be 
the owner of any bullion, jewellery or other valuable article and the Assessing 
Officer finds that the amount spent on making such investments or in acquiring 
such articles exceeds the amount recorded in the books of account maintained by 
the assessee and he offers no explanation for the difference or the explanation 
offered is unsatisfactory in the opinion of the Assessing Officer, such excess may 
be deemed to be the income of the assessee for such financial year. 
Example:  
If the assessee is found to be the owner of say 300 gms of gold (market value of which 
is ` 25,000) during the financial year ending 31.3.2024 but he has recorded to have 
spent ` 15,000 in acquiring it, the Assessing Officer can add ` 10,000 (i.e,. the 
difference of the market value of such gold and ` 15,000) as the income of the 
assessee, if the assessee offers no satisfactory explanation thereof. 
(v)  Unexplained expenditure [Section 69C] 
Where in any financial year an assessee has incurred any expenditure and he offers 
no explanation about the source of such expenditure or the explanation is 
unsatisfactory in the opinion of the Assessing Officer, Assessing Officer can treat 
such unexplained expenditure as the income of the assessee for such financial year. 
Such unexplained expenditure which is deemed to be the income of the assessee 
shall not be allowed as deduction under any head of income. 
(vi) Amount borrowed or repaid on hundi [Section 69D] 
Where any amount is borrowed on a hundi or any amount due thereon is repaid other 
than through an account-payee cheque drawn on a bank, the amount so borrowed or 
repaid shall be deemed to be the income of the person borrowing or repaying for the 
previous year in which the amount was borrowed or repaid, as the case may be. 
However, where any amount borrowed on a hundi has been deemed to be the 
income of any person, he will not be again liable to be assessed in respect of such 
amount on repayment of such amount. The amount repaid shall include interest 
paid on the amount borrowed. 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.51 
6. RATES OF TAX, SURCHARGE & CESS 
Income-tax 
Income-tax is to be charged on every person at the rates prescribed for the year by the 
Annual Finance Act or the Income-tax Act, 1961 or both. 
Surcharge 
Surcharge is an additional tax payable over and above the income-tax. Surcharge 
is levied as a percentage of income-tax. Under the normal provisions of the Act, 
surcharge is presently being levied beyond a particular threshold of income for 
different persons. Also, higher rates of surcharge are prescribed for higher 
thresholds of income. Under the special tax regimes for domestic companies and 
co-operative societies, a uniform surcharge is prescribed irrespective of the level of 
total income.  
“Health and Education cess” on Income-tax 
The amount of income-tax as increased by the union surcharge, if applicable, 
should be further increased by an additional surcharge called the “Health and 
Education cess on income-tax”, calculated at the rate of 4% of such income-tax and 
surcharge, if applicable. Health and education cess is leviable in the case of all 
assessees i.e. individuals, HUF, AOPs/BOIs, Artificial Juridical Persons, firms, local 
authorities, co-operative societies and companies.   
It is leviable to fulfill the commitment of the Government to provide and finance 
quality health services and universalised quality basic education and secondary and 
higher education. 
6.1 Individual/Hindu Undivided Family (HUF)/Association of 
Persons 
(AOP)/Body 
of 
Individuals 
(BOI)/Artificial 
Juridical Person 
Income-tax 
Individuals/HUF/AoPs/BoIs and Artificial Juridical Persons can pay tax at 
concessional rates under the default tax regime under section 115BAC. However, he/it 
has to forego certain exemptions and deductions under this regime. Alternatively, 
they can exercise the option to shift out of the default tax regime and pay tax under 
the optional tax regime as per the regular provisions of the Act at the tax rates 
prescribed by the Annual Finance Act of that year. 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.52 
Default tax regime under section 115BAC of the Income-tax Act, 1961 
I.   Concessional tax rates 
Individuals/ HUF/ AoPs/ BoIs or artificial judicial persons, other than those who 
exercise the option to opt out this regime under section 115BAC(6), have to pay tax 
in respect of their total income (other than income chargeable to tax at special rates 
under Chapter XII such as section 111A, 112, 112A, 115BB, 115BBJ etc.) at the 
following concessional rates, subject to certain conditions specified under section 
115BAC(2)  – 
(i) 
Upto ` 3,00,000 
NIL 
(ii) 
From ` 3,00,001 to ` 6,00,000 
5% 
(iii) 
From ` 6,00,001 to ` 9,00,000 
10% 
(iv) 
From ` 9,00,001 to ` 12,00,000 
15% 
(v) 
From ` 12,00,001 to ` 15,00,000 
20% 
(vii) 
Above ` 15,00,000 
30% 
II.  Conditions to be satisfied  
The following are the conditions to be satisfied: 
S. No. 
Particulars 
(1) 
Certain deductions/exemptions not allowable: Section 115BAC(2) 
provides 
that 
while 
computing 
total 
income, 
the 
following  
deductions/exemptions would not be allowed: 
Section 
Exemption/Deduction 
10(5) 
Leave travel concession  
10(13A) 
House rent allowance  
10(14) 
Exemption in respect of special allowances or benefit to 
meet expenses relating to duties or personal expenses 
(other than those as may be prescribed for this purpose) 
10(17) 
Daily allowance or constituency allowance of MPs 
and MLAs 
10(32) 
Exemption in respect of income of minor child 
included in the income of parent 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.53 
10AA 
Tax holiday for units established in SEZ 
16 
(i) Entertainment allowance 
(ii) Professional tax  
24(b) 
Interest on loan in respect of self-occupied property 
32(1)(iia) 
Additional depreciation 
35(1)(ii),(iia),(iii) 
or 35(2AA) 
Deduction in respect of contribution to  
- 
notified 
approved 
research 
association/ 
university/college/other institutions for scientific 
research [Section 35(1)(ii)] 
-  approved Indian company for scientific research 
[Section 35(1)(iia)] 
-  notified 
approved 
research 
association/ 
university/college/other institutions for research 
in social science or statistical research [Section 
35(1)(iii)] 
- 
An approved National laboratory/university/IIT/ 
specified 
person 
for 
scientific 
research 
undertaken under an approved programme 
[Section 35(2AA)] 
35AD 
Investment 
linked 
tax 
incentives 
for 
specified 
businesses 
80C to 80U 
Deductions 
under 
Chapter 
VI-A 
(other 
than 
employers contribution towards NPS under section 
80CCD(2), Central Government contribution towards 
Agnipath Scheme under section 80CCH(2) and 
deduction in respect of employment of new 
employees under section 80JJAA). 
(2) 
Certain losses not allowed to be set-off: While computing total income, 
set-off of any loss - 
(i) 
carried forward or depreciation from any earlier assessment year, if 
such loss or depreciation is attributable to any of the deductions 
referred to in (1) above; or   
(ii) under the head house property with any other head of income; 
would not be allowed. 
 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.54 
(3) 
Depreciation or additional depreciation: Depreciation u/s 32 is to be 
determined in the prescribed manner. Depreciation in respect of any block 
of assets entitled to more than 40%, would be restricted to 40% on the 
written down value of such block of assets. Additional depreciation u/s 
32(1)(iia), however, cannot be claimed. 
(4) 
Exemption or deduction for allowances or perquisite: While 
computing total income, any exemption or deduction for allowances or 
perquisite, by whatever name called, provided under any other law for the 
time being force in India would not be allowed. 
Additional points: 
Total income under default tax regime should be computed without set-off of any 
loss brought forward or depreciation from any earlier assessment year, where such 
loss or depreciation is attributable to any of the deductions listed in (1) above. Such 
loss and depreciation would be deemed to have been already given effect to and 
no further deduction for such loss or depreciation shall be allowed for any 
subsequent year. 
Where income-tax on total income of the assessee is computed under this section 
and there is a depreciation allowance in respect of a block of asset from an earlier 
assessment year attributable to additional depreciation u/s 32(1)(iia), which has 
not been given full effect to prior to A.Y. 2024-25 and which is not allowed to be 
set-off in the A.Y.2024-25 due to section 115BAC, corresponding adjustment shall 
be made to the WDV of such block of assets as on 1.4.2023 in the prescribed 
manner i.e., the WDV as on 1.4.2023 will be increased by the unabsorbed 
additional depreciation not allowed to be set-off. 
Example: Let us consider the case of Mr. X, who carries on business of 
manufacturing of steel. He has unabsorbed depreciation as on 1.4.2023, which 
includes amount attributable to additional depreciation u/s 32(1)(iia) of P.Y.2022-
23 or any earlier previous year in respect of block of plant and machinery. If he 
pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC for P.Y.2023-24 relevant 
to A.Y.2024-25, the amount so attributable to additional depreciation of earlier 
year remaining unabsorbed as on 1.4.2023 would not be eligible for set-off against 
current year income and no further deduction for such loss or depreciation shall 
be allowed for any subsequent year. Accordingly, the WDV of the block as on 
1.4.2023 has to be increased by the said amount not allowed to be set-off. 
III. 
Time limit for exercising the option to shift out of the default tax regime 
(i) 
In case of an assessee having no income from business or profession: 
Where  such  individual/HUF/AoP/BoI or Artificial Juridical person is not having 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.55 
income from business or profession, he/it can exercise an option to shift out/opt 
out of the default tax regime under this section and such option has to be 
exercised along  with  the  return  of  income  to  be  furnished  under section 
139(1) for a previous year relevant to the assessment year. In effect, such 
individual/HUF/AoP/BoI or Artificial Juridical person can choose whether or not 
to exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime in each previous 
year. He may choose to pay tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC 
in one year and exercise the option to shift out of default tax regime in another 
year.    
(ii)  In case of an assessee having income from business or profession: Such  
individual/HUF/AoP/BoI or Artificial Juridical person having income from 
business or profession has an option to shift out/ opt out of the default tax 
regime under this section and the option has to be exercised on or before  the  
due  date  specified  under section 139(1) for furnishing  the  return  of  income  
for  such  previous  year and once such option is exercised, it would apply to 
subsequent assessment years. 
 
Such person who has exercised the above option of shifting out of the default 
tax regime for any previous year shall be able to withdraw such option only 
once and pay tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC for a 
previous year other than the year in which it was exercised.  
Thereafter, such person shall never be eligible to exercise option under this 
section, except where such person ceases to have any business income in which 
case, option under (i) above would be available. 
AMT liability not attracted: Individual/HUF/AoP/BoI or Artificial Juridical person 
paying tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC is not liable to alternate 
minimum tax u/s 115JC. Such person would not be eligible to claim AMT credit also. 
Note: It may be noted that in case of Individual/HUF/AoP/BoI or Artificial Juridical 
person not having income from business or profession, the total income and tax 
liability (including provisions relating to AMT, if applicable under normal provisions) 
may be computed every year both in accordance with the regular provisions of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961 and in accordance with the provisions of section 115BAC, in 
order to determine which is more beneficial and accordingly such person may decide 
whether to pay tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC or exercise the 
option to shift out and pay tax under normal provisions of the Act for that year.  
 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.56 
ILLUSTRATION 3 
Mr. X has a total income of ` 16,00,000 for P.Y.2023-24, comprising of income from 
house property and interest on fixed deposits. Compute his tax liability for A.Y.2024-
25 under the default tax regime under section 115BAC. 
SOLUTION 
Computation of Tax liability of Mr. X for A.Y. 2024-25 
Tax liability: 
First  ` 3,00,000 
- Nil 
 
Next ` 3,00,001 – ` 6,00,000 
- @5% of ` 3,00,000     =  ` 15,000 
Next ` 6,00,001 – ` 9,00,000 
- @10% of ` 3,00,000     =  ` 30,000 
Next  ` 9,00,001 – ` 12,00,000 
- @15% of ` 3,00,000   =  ` 45,000 
Next ` 12,00,001 – ` 15,00,000 
- @20% of ` 3,00,000     =  ` 60,000 
Balance i.e., ` 16,00,000 minus ` 15,00,000 
- @30% of ` 1,00,000 =     ` 30,000 
 
 
 
=  ` 1,80,000 
Add: Health and Education cess@4% 
                                     =  
` 7,200 
  
 
              = ` 1,87,200 
Tax rates prescribed by the Annual Finance Act for optional tax regime  
The slab rates for A.Y. 2024-25 applicable to an Individual/HUF/AOP/BOI/ Artificial 
Juridical Person, which has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax 
regime, are as follows: 
(i) 
where the total income does 
not exceed ` 2,50,000 
NIL 
(ii) 
where 
the 
total 
income 
exceeds ` 2,50,000 but does 
not exceed ` 5,00,000 
5% of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds ` 2,50,000 
(iii) where 
the 
total 
income 
exceeds ` 5,00,000 but does 
not exceed ` 10,00,000 
` 12,500 plus 20% of the amount by which 
the total income exceeds ` 5,00,000 
(iv) where 
the 
total 
income 
exceeds ` 10,00,000 
` 1,12,500 plus 30% of the amount by which 
the total income exceeds ` 10,00,000 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.57 
For a senior citizen (being a resident individual who is of the age of 60 years or 
more at any time during the previous year), the basic exemption limit is ` 3,00,000 
and for a very senior citizen (being a resident individual who is of the age of 80 
years or more at any time during the previous year), the basic exemption limit is  
` 5,00,000. Therefore, the tax slabs for these assessees would be as follows – 
For senior citizens (being resident individuals of the age of 60 years or more 
but less than 80 years)  
(i) 
where the total income does 
not exceed ` 3,00,000 
NIL 
(ii) 
where 
the 
total 
income 
exceeds ` 3,00,000 but does 
not exceed ` 5,00,000 
5% of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds ` 3,00,000 
(iii) where 
the 
total 
income 
exceeds ` 5,00,000 but does 
not exceed ` 10,00,000 
` 10,000 plus 20% of the amount by which 
the total income exceeds ` 5,00,000 
(iv) where 
the 
total 
income 
exceeds ` 10,00,000 
` 1,10,000 plus 30% of the amount by which 
the total income exceeds ` 10,00,000 
For resident individuals of the age of 80 years or more at any time during the 
previous year 
(i) 
where the total income does 
not exceed ` 5,00,000 
NIL 
(ii) 
where 
the 
total 
income 
exceeds ` 5,00,000 but does 
not exceed ` 10,00,000 
20% of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds ` 5,00,000 
(iii) where 
the 
total 
income 
exceeds ` 10,00,000 
` 1,00,000 plus 30% of the amount by which 
the 
total 
income 
exceeds  
` 10,00,000 
Clarification regarding attaining prescribed age of 60 years/ 80 years on  
31st March itself, in case of senior/very senior citizens whose date of birth 
falls on 1st April [Circular No. 28/2016, dated 27-07-2016] 
The CBDT has clarified that a person born on 1st April would be considered to have 
attained a particular age on 31st March, the day preceding the anniversary of his 
birthday. In particular, the question of attainment of age of eligibility for being 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.58 
considered a senior/very senior citizen would be decided on the basis of above 
criteria.  
Therefore, a resident individual whose 60th birthday falls on 1st April, 2024, would 
be treated as having attained the age of 60 years in the P.Y.2023-24 and would be 
eligible for higher basic exemption limit of ` 3 lakh while computing his tax liability 
for A.Y.2024-25 under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the 
Act. Likewise, a resident individual whose 80th birthday falls on 1st April, 2024, would 
be treated as having attained the age of 80 years in the P.Y.2023-24, and would be 
eligible for higher basic exemption limit of ` 5 lakh in computing his tax liability for 
A.Y.2024-25 under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act. 
In respect of certain types of income, as mentioned below, the Income-tax Act, 
1961 has prescribed specific rates. The special rates of tax have to be applied on 
the respective component of total income irrespective of the tax regime and the 
slab rates have to be applied on the balance of total income after adjusting the 
basic exemption limit. 
S. 
No. 
Section 
Income 
Rate of 
Tax 
(a) 
112 
Long term capital gains  (other than LTCG taxable as 
per section 112A) 
20% 
(b) 
112A 
Long term capital gains on transfer of –  
• 
Equity share in a company 
• 
Unit of an equity oriented fund 
• 
Unit of business trust 
Condition for availing the benefit of this concessional 
rate is that securities transaction tax should have been 
paid – 
In case of (Capital 
Asset) 
Time of payment of 
STT 
Equity shares in a 
company 
both at the time of 
acquisition and transfer 
Unit 
of 
equity 
oriented fund or unit 
of business trust 
at the time of transfer 
Note: LTCG upto ` 1 lakh is exempt. LTCG 
exceeding ` 1 lakh is taxable @10%. 
10% 
[On LTCG 
> ` 1 lakh] 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.59 
(c) 
111A 
Short-term capital gains on transfer of – 
• 
Equity shares in a company 
• 
Unit of an equity oriented fund 
• 
Unit of business trust 
The conditions for availing the benefit of this 
concessional rate are – 
(i) the transaction of sale of such equity share or 
unit should be entered into on or after 
1.10.2004; and 
(ii) such transaction should be chargeable to 
securities transaction tax. 
15% 
(d) 
115BB 
Winnings from 
• 
Lotteries; 
• 
Crossword puzzles; 
• 
Races including horse races; 
• 
Card games and other games of any sort; 
• 
Gambling or betting of any form or nature 
(other than winning from any online game) 
30% 
(e) 
115BBJ 
Net winnings from online games 
30% 
(f) 
115BBE 
 
Unexplained money, investment, expenditure, etc. 
deemed as income under section 68 or section 69 or 
section 69A or section 69B or section 69C or section 
69D [See discussion below] 
60% 
Unexplained money, investments etc. to attract tax@60% [Section 115BBE] 
(i) 
In order to control laundering of unaccounted money by availing the benefit 
of basic exemption limit, the unexplained money, investment, expenditure, 
etc. deemed as income under section 68 or section 69 or section 69A or 
section 69B or section 69C or section 69D would be taxed at the rate of 60% 
plus surcharge @25% of tax. Thus, the effective rate of tax (including 
surcharge@25% of tax and cess@4% of tax and surcharge) is 78%. 
(ii) 
No basic exemption or allowance or expenditure shall be allowed to the 
assessee under any provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961 in computing such 
deemed income. 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.60 
(iii) 
Further, no set off of any loss shall be allowable against income brought to 
tax under sections 68 or section 69 or section 69A or section 69B or section 
69C or section 69D. 
ILLUSTRATION 4 
Mr. X has a total income of ` 16,00,000 for P.Y.2023-24, comprising of income from 
house property and interest on fixed deposits. Compute his tax liability for A.Y.2024-
25 assuming his age is – 
(a)  45 years 
(b)  63 years 
(c) 
82 years 
Assume that Mr. X has exercised the option to shift out/ opt out of the default tax 
regime.  
SOLUTION 
(a)  Computation of Tax liability of Mr. X (aged 45 years) 
Tax liability: 
First  ` 2,50,000 
- Nil 
 
Next ` 2,50,001 – ` 5,00,000 
- @5% of ` 2,50,000     =  ` 12,500 
Next  ` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 
- @20% of ` 5,00,000   =  ` 1,00,000 
Balance i.e., ` 16,00,000 minus ` 10,00,000- @30% of ` 6,00,000 =  ` 1,80,000 
 
 
 
=  ` 2,92,500 
Add: Health and Education cess@4% 
                                     =  ` 11,700 
  
 
              = ` 3,04,200 
(b)  Computation of Tax liability of Mr. X (aged 63 years) 
Tax liability: 
First  ` 3,00,000 
- Nil 
 
Next ` 3,00,001 – ` 5,00,000 
- @5% of ` 2,00,000 
=  ` 10,000 
Next  ` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 
- @20% of ` 5,00,000 =  ` 1,00,000 
 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.61 
Balance i.e., ` 16,00,000 minus ` 10,00,000- @30% of ` 6,00,000 = ` 1,80,000 
 
 
 
=  ` 2,90,000 
Add: Health and Education cess@4% 
                                    =  ` 11,600 
  
 
 
 = ` 3,01,600 
(c)  Computation of Tax liability of Mr. X (aged 82 years) 
Tax liability: 
First  ` 5,00,000 
- Nil 
 
Next  ` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 
- @ 20% of ` 5,00,000  = ` 1,00,000 
Balance i.e., ` 16,00,000 minus ` 10,00,000- @ 30% of ` 6,00,000 = ` 1,80,000 
 
 
 
 =` 2,80,000 
Add: Health and Education cess@4% 
                                     = ` 11,200 
  
 
 
=` 2,91,200 
Surcharge 
In case the Individual/HUF/AoP4/BoI and Artificial Juridical Person pays tax 
under default tax regime under section 115BAC 
Income-tax computed in accordance with the provisions of section 115BAC and/ or 
section 111A or section 112 or section 112A or 115BBE or section 115BBJ would be 
increased by surcharge given under the following table: 
 
 
Particulars 
Rate of 
surcharge 
on income-
tax 
Example 
Components of 
total income 
Applicable rate 
of surcharge 
(i) 
Where 
the 
total 
income 
(including 
dividend 
income 
and capital gains 
chargeable to tax 
u/s 111A, 112 and 
112A) > ` 50 lakhs 
but ≤ ` 1 crore 
10% 
Example 
• Dividend 
` 
15 
lakhs; 
• STCG u/s 111A  
` 15 lakhs; 
• LTCG u/s 112  
` 25 lakhs;  
Surcharge would 
be 
levied@10% 
on 
income-tax 
computed 
on 
total income of  
` 1 crore. 
 
4 (other than an AOP consisting of only companies as members) 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.62 
• LTCG u/s 112A  
` 20 lakhs; and 
• Other 
income  
` 25 lakhs 
(ii) Where total income 
(including dividend 
income and capital 
gains chargeable to 
tax u/s 111A, 112 
and 112A) > ` 1 
crore but ≤ ` 2 crore 
15% 
Example 
• Dividend income  
` 10 lakhs; 
• STCG u/s 111A  
` 35 lakhs; 
• LTCG u/s 112  
` 50 lakhs; 
• LTCG 
u/s 
112A  
` 35 lakhs; and 
• Other 
income  
` 55 lakhs  
Surcharge would 
be 
levied@15% 
on 
income-tax 
computed 
on 
total income of  
` 1.85 crores.   
(iii) Where total income 
(excluding 
dividend 
income and capital 
gains chargeable to 
tax u/s 111A, 112 and 
112A) > ` 2 crore  
25% 
Example 
• Dividend income  
` 51 lakhs; 
• STCG u/s 111A  
` 44 lakh; 
• LTCG 
u/s 
112  
` 42 lakhs; 
• LTCG u/s 112A  
` 55 lakh; and 
• Other 
income  
` 6 crores 
Surcharge@15% 
would be levied 
on income-tax on: 
• Dividend 
income of ` 51 
lakhs; 
• STCG of ` 44 
lakhs 
chargeable to 
tax u/s 111A; 
• LTCG of ` 42 
lakhs 
chargeable to 
tax u/s 112; 
and 
• LTCG of ` 55 
lakhs 
chargeable to 
tax u/s 112A. 
The 
rate 
of 
surcharge on the 
income-tax payable 
on the portion of 
dividend 
income 
and capital gains 
chargeable to tax 
u/s 111A, 112 and 
112A 
Not 
exceeding 
15% 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.63 
Surcharge@25% 
would be leviable 
on 
income-tax 
computed 
on 
other income of  
` 
6 
crores 
included in total 
income 
(iv) Where total income 
(including dividend 
income and capital 
gains chargeable to 
tax u/s 111A, 112 
and 112A) > ` 2 
crore in cases not 
covered under (iii) 
above 
15% 
Example 
• Dividend income  
` 40 lakhs; 
• STCG u/s 111A  
` 35 lakhs; 
• LTCG u/s 112       ` 
42 lakhs; 
• LTCG 
u/s 
112A  
` 50 lakhs; and 
• Other 
income  
` 1.10 crore 
Surcharge would 
be 
levied@15% 
on 
income-tax 
computed 
on 
total income of  
` 2.77 crore.  
Marginal relief 
The purpose of marginal relief is to ensure that the increase in amount of tax 
payable (including surcharge) due to increase in total income of an assessee 
beyond the prescribed limit should not exceed the amount of increase in total 
income. 
Marginal relief is available in case of such persons paying tax under default tax 
regime u/s 115BAC referred to in above i.e., - 
 
Particulars 
Marginal relief 
(i) 
Where 
the 
total 
income > ` 50 lakhs 
but ≤ ` 1 crore 
Step 1 - Compute income-tax on total income; and 
add surcharge@10% on such income-tax (A) 
Step 2 - Compute income-tax on ` 50 lakhs  
Step 3 - Total income (-) ` 50 lakhs 
Step 4 - Add the amount computed in Step 2 and Step 
3 (B) 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.64 
Step 5 – Income-tax liability on total income (along 
with surcharge) would be the lower of the amount 
arrived at in Step 1 (i.e., A) or Step 4 (i.e., B). 
Consequently, if A>B, the marginal relief would be  
A – B. 
(ii) Where 
the 
total 
income > ` 1 crore 
but ≤ ` 2 crores 
Step 1 - Compute income-tax on total income; and 
add surcharge@15% on income-tax (C) 
Step 2 - Compute income-tax on total income of ` 1 
crore + surcharge on such income-tax@10%  
Step 3 - Total income (-) ` 1 crore 
Step 4 - Add the amount computed in Step 2 and Step 
3 (D) 
Step 5 – Income-tax liability on total income (along 
with surcharge) would be the lower of the amount 
arrived at in Step 1 (i.e., C) or Step 4 (i.e., D). 
Consequently, if C>D, the marginal relief would be  
C – D. 
(iii) Where 
the 
total 
income > ` 2 crores 
Step 1 - Compute income-tax on total income; and 
add surcharge@25% on income-tax (E) 
Step 2 - Compute income-tax on total income of ` 2 
crore + surcharge on such income-tax@15% 
Step 3 - Total income (-) ` 2 crore 
Step 4 - Add the amount computed in Step 2 and Step 
3 (F) 
Step 5 – Income-tax liability on total income (along 
with surcharge) would be the lower of the amount 
arrived at in Step 1 (i.e., E) or Step 4 (i.e., F). 
Consequently, if E>F, the marginal relief would be  
E – F. 
Note – It is presumed that the total income referred to above does not include 
dividend income, long term capital gains taxable under section 112/ 112A and 
short-term capital gains taxable under section 111A. 
In case the total income includes dividend income, long term capital gains taxable 
under section 112/ 112A or short term capital gains taxable under section 111A, 
surcharge on income-tax computed on such dividend income and capital gains 
cannot exceed 15%. This must be kept in mind while computing marginal relief in 
cases referred to in (iii) above. 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.65 
In case the Individual/HUF/AoP5/BoI and Artificial Juridical Person exercises 
the option to shift out of the default tax regime 
Income-tax computed in accordance with normal provisions of the Act or section 
111A or section 112 or section 112A or 115BBE or section 115BBJ would be 
increased by surcharge given under the following table: 
 
 
Particulars 
Rate of 
surcharge 
on income-
tax 
Example 
Components of 
total income 
Applicable rate of 
surcharge 
(i) 
Where 
the 
total 
income 
(including 
dividend 
income 
and capital gains 
chargeable to tax 
u/s 111A, 112 and 
112A) > ` 50 lakhs 
but ≤ ` 1 crore 
10% 
Example 
• Dividend 
` 
10 
lakhs; 
• STCG u/s 111A  
` 20 lakhs; 
• LTCG u/s 112  
` 15 lakhs;  
• LTCG u/s 112A  
` 20 lakhs; and 
• Other 
income  
` 25 lakhs 
Surcharge would be 
levied@10% 
on 
income-tax 
computed on total 
income 
of 
` 90 
lakhs. 
(ii) 
Where total income 
(including 
dividend 
income and capital 
gains chargeable to 
tax u/s 111A, 112 
and 112A) > ` 1 
crore but ≤ ` 2 crore 
15% 
Example 
• Dividend income  
` 10 lakhs; 
• STCG u/s 111A  
` 40 lakhs; 
• LTCG u/s 112  
` 55 lakhs; 
• LTCG 
u/s 
112A  
` 35 lakhs; and 
• Other 
income  
` 50 lakhs  
Surcharge would be 
levied@15% 
on 
income-tax 
computed on total 
income of ` 1.90 
crores.   
(iii) Where total income 
(excluding 
dividend 
income and capital 
gains chargeable to 
tax u/s 111A, 112 and 
25% 
Example 
• Dividend income  
` 51 lakhs; 
Surcharge@15% 
would be levied on 
income-tax on: 
 
5 (other than an AOP consisting of only companies as members) 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.66 
112A) > ` 2 crore but 
≤ ` 5 crore 
• STCG u/s 111A  
` 44 lakh; 
• LTCG 
u/s 
112  
` 42 lakhs; 
• LTCG u/s 112A  
` 55 lakh; and 
• Other 
income  
` 3 crores 
• Dividend income 
of ` 51 lakhs; 
• STCG of ` 44 
lakhs chargeable 
to tax u/s 111A; 
• LTCG of ` 42 
lakhs chargeable 
to tax u/s 112; 
and 
• LTCG of ` 55 
lakhs chargeable 
to tax u/s 112A. 
Surcharge@25% 
would be leviable 
on 
income-tax 
computed on other 
income of ` 3 crores 
included 
in 
total 
income 
The 
rate 
of 
surcharge on the 
income-tax payable 
on the portion of 
dividend 
income 
and capital gains 
chargeable to tax 
u/s 111A, 112 and 
112A 
Not 
exceeding 
15% 
 
 
(iv) Where total income 
(excluding dividend 
income and capital 
gains chargeable to 
tax u/s 111A, 112 
and 112A) > ` 5 
crore 
37% 
Example 
• Dividend income  
` 60 lakhs; 
• STCG u/s 111A  
` 50 lakhs; 
• LTCG u/s 112        
` 42 lakhs; 
• LTCG u/s 112A  
` 25 lakhs; and 
• Other income 
` 6 crore 
Surcharge@15% 
would be levied on 
income-tax on: 
• Dividend income 
of ` 60 lakhs; 
• STCG of ` 50 
lakhs chargeable 
to tax u/s 111A;  
• LTCG of ` 42 
lakhs chargeable 
to tax u/s 112; 
and   
• LTCG of ` 25 
lakhs chargeable 
to tax u/s 112A. 
Surcharge@37% 
would be leviable on 
the 
income-tax 
Rate of surcharge 
on the income-tax 
payable 
on 
the 
portion of dividend 
income and capital 
gains chargeable to 
tax u/s 111A, 112 
and 112A 
Not 
exceeding 
15% 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.67 
computed on other 
income of ` 6 crores 
included 
in 
total 
income.  
(v) 
Where total income 
(including dividend 
income and capital 
gains chargeable to 
tax u/s 111A, 112 
and 112A) > ` 2 
crore in cases not 
covered under (iii) 
and (iv) above 
15% 
Example 
• Dividend income  
` 55 lakhs; 
• STCG u/s 111A  
` 60 lakhs; 
• LTCG u/s 112 ` 42 
lakhs; 
• LTCG 
u/s 
112A  
` 35 lakhs; and 
• Other 
income  
` 1.10 crore 
Surcharge would be 
levied@15% 
on 
income-tax 
computed on total 
income of ` 3.02 
crore.  
Marginal relief 
Marginal relief in case of such persons referred to in above under the optional tax 
regime (as per the normal provisions of the Act).  
 
Particulars 
Marginal relief 
(i) 
Where 
the 
total 
income > ` 50 lakhs 
but ≤ ` 1 crore 
Step 1 - Compute income-tax on total income; and 
add surcharge@10% on such income-tax (A) 
Step 2 - Compute income-tax  on ` 50 lakhs  
Step 3 - Total income (-) ` 50 lakhs 
Step 4 - Add the amount computed in Step 2 and Step 
3 (B) 
Step 5 – Income-tax liability on total income (along 
with surcharge) would be the lower of the amount 
arrived at in Step 1 (i.e., A) or Step 4 (i.e., B). 
Consequently, if A>B, the marginal relief would be  
A – B. 
(ii) Where 
the 
total 
income > ` 1 crore 
but ≤ ` 2 crores 
Step 1 - Compute income-tax on total income; and 
add surcharge@15% on income-tax (C) 
Step 2 - Compute income-tax on total income of ` 1 
crore + surcharge on such income-tax@10%  

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.68 
Step 3 - Total income (-) ` 1 crore 
Step 4 - Add the amount computed in Step 2 and Step 
3 (D) 
Step 5 – Income-tax liability on total income (along 
with surcharge) would be the lower of the amount 
arrived at in Step 1 (i.e., C) or Step 4 (i.e., D). 
Consequently, if C>D, the marginal relief would be  
C – D. 
(iii) Where 
the 
total 
income > ` 2 crores 
but ≤ ` 5 crores 
Step 1 - Compute income-tax on total income; and 
add surcharge@25% on income-tax (E) 
Step 2 - Compute income-tax on total income of ` 2 
crore + surcharge on such income-tax@15% 
Step 3 - Total income (-) ` 2 crore 
Step 4 - Add the amount computed in Step 2 and Step 
3 (F) 
Step 5 – Income-tax liability on total income (along 
with surcharge) would be the lower of the amount 
arrived at in Step 1 (i.e., E) or Step 4 (i.e., F). 
Consequently, if E>F, the marginal relief would be  
E – F. 
(iv) Where 
the 
total 
income > ` 5 crores 
Step 1 - Compute income-tax on total income; and 
add surcharge@37% on income-tax (G) 
Step 2 - Compute income-tax on total income of ` 5 
crore + surcharge on such income-tax@25% 
Step 3 - Total income (-) ` 5 crore 
Step 4 - Add the amount computed in Step 2 and Step 
3 (H) 
Step 5 – Income-tax liability on total income (along 
with surcharge) would be the lower of the amount 
arrived at in Step 1 (i.e., G) or Step 4 (i.e., H). 
Consequently, if G>H, the marginal relief would be  
G – H. 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.69 
Note – It is presumed that the total income referred to above does not include 
dividend income, long term capital gains taxable under section 112/ 112A and 
short-term capital gains taxable under section 111A. 
In case the total income includes dividend income, long term capital gains taxable 
under section 112/ 112A or short term capital gains taxable under section 111A, 
surcharge on income-tax computed on such dividend income and capital gains 
cannot exceed 15%. This must be kept in mind while computing marginal relief in 
cases referred to in (iii) and (iv) above. 
ILLUSTRATION 5 
Compute the tax liability of Mr. A (aged 42), having total income of ` 51 lakhs for the 
Assessment Year 2024-25. Assume that his total income comprises of salary income, 
Income from house property and interest on fixed deposit. Assume that  
Mr. A has exercised the option to shift out of section 115BAC.  
SOLUTION 
Computation of tax liability of Mr. A for the A.Y.2024-25 
(A) 
Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of ` 51,00,000 
 
` 2,50,000 – ` 5,00,000 @5% 
` 12,500 
 
` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 @20% 
` 1,00,000 
 
` 10,00,001 – ` 51,00,000 @30% 
` 12,30,000 
 
Total 
` 13,42,500 
 
Add: Surcharge @ 10% 
` 1,34,250 
` 14,76,750 
(B)  Income-tax computed on total income of ` 50 lakhs 
 
(` 12,500 plus ` 1,00,000 plus ` 12,00,000) 
 
` 13,12,500 
(C) 
Total Income Less ` 50 lakhs 
 
` 1,00,000 
(D) 
Income-tax computed on total income of ` 50 lakhs plus the  
 
excess of total income over ` 50 lakhs (B +C) 
 
 ` 14,12,500 
(E) 
Tax liability: lower of (A) and (D) 
 
` 14,12,500 
 
Add: Health and education cess @4% 
 
       ` 56,500 
 
Tax liability (including cess) 
 
` 14,69,000 
(F) 
Marginal Relief (A – D) 
 
    ` 64,250 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.70 
Alternative method -  
(A) 
Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of ` 51,00,000 
 
` 2,50,000 – ` 5,00,000@5% 
` 12,500 
 
` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000@20% 
` 1,00,000 
 
` 10,00,001 – ` 51,00,000@30% 
` 12,30,000 
 
Total 
` 13,42,500 
 
Add: Surcharge@10% 
  ` 1,34,250 
` 14,76,750 
(B)  Income-tax computed on total income of ` 50 lakhs  
 
(` 12,500 plus ` 1,00,000 plus ` 12,00,000) 
 
` 13,12,500 
(C) 
Excess tax payable (A)-(B) 
 
` 1,64,250 
(D) 
Marginal Relief (` 1,64,250 – ` 1,00,000, being the amount 
 
of income in excess of ` 50,00,000) 
 
    ` 64,250 
(E) 
Tax liability (A)-(D) 
 
` 14,12,500 
 
Add: Health and education cess @4% 
 
        ` 56,500 
 
Tax liability (including cess) 
 
` 14,69,000 
ILLUSTRATION 6 
Compute the tax liability of Mr. B (aged 51) under the default tax regime, having total 
income of ` 1,01,00,000 for the Assessment Year 2024-25. Assume that his total income 
comprises of salary income, Income from house property and interest on fixed deposit. 
SOLUTION 
Computation of tax liability of Mr. B for the A.Y. 2024-25 
(A) 
Income-tax 
(including 
surcharge) 
computed 
on 
total 
income 
of  
` 1,01,00,000 
 
` 3,00,000 – ` 6,00,000@5% 
 
` 15,000 
 
` 6,00,001 – ` 9,00,000@10% 
 
` 30,000 
 
` 9,00,001 – ` 12,00,000@15% 
 
` 45,000 
 
` 12,00,001 – ` 15,00,000@20% 
 
` 60,000 
 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.71 
 
` 15,00,001 – ` 1,01,00,000@30% 
 
` 25,80,000 
 
Total 
 
` 27,30,000 
 
Add: Surcharge@15% 
 
      ` 4,09,500 
 
Tax liability without marginal relief 
 
` 31,39,500 
(B)  Income-tax computed on total income of ` 1 crore  
 
(` 1,50,000 plus ` 25,50,000) 
 
` 27,00,000 
 
Add: Surcharge@10% 
 
    ` 2,70,000 
 
 
 
` 29,70,000 
(C) 
Total Income Less ` 1 crore 
 
` 1,00,000 
(D) 
Income-tax computed on total income of ` 1 crore plus the  
 
excess of total income over ` 1 crore (B +C) 
 
` 30,70,000 
(E) 
Tax liability: lower of (A) & (D) 
 
` 30,70,000 
 
Add: Health and education cess @4% 
 
    ` 1,22,800 
 
Tax liability (including cess) 
 
 ` 31,92,800 
(F) 
Marginal relief (A-D) 
 
` 69,500 
Alternative method: 
(A) 
Income-tax 
(including 
surcharge) 
computed 
on 
total 
income 
of  
` 1,01,00,000 
 
` 3,00,000 – ` 6,00,000@5% 
` 15,000 
 
` 6,00,001 – ` 9,00,000@10% 
` 30,000 
 
` 9,00,001 – ` 12,00,000@15% 
` 45,000 
 
` 12,00,001 – ` 15,00,000@20% 
` 60,000 
 
` 15,00,001 – ` 1,01,00,000@30% 
` 25,80,000 
 
Total 
` 27,30,000 
 
Add: Surcharge @ 15% 
 ` 4,09,500 
` 31,39,500 
(B)  Income-tax computed on total income of ` 1 crore 
 
[(` 1,50,000 plus ` 25,50,000) plus surcharge@10%]  
` 29,70,000 
(C) 
Excess tax payable (A)-(B) 
 
` 1,69,500 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.72 
(D) 
Marginal Relief (` 1,69,500 – ` 1,00,000, being the amount 
 
of income in excess of ` 1,00,00,000) 
 
` 69,500 
(E) 
Tax liability (A) - (D) 
 
` 30,70,000 
 
Add: Health and education cess @4% 
 
     ` 1,22,800 
 
Tax liability (including cess) 
 
` 31,92,800 
ILLUSTRATION 7 
Compute the tax liability of Mr. C (aged 58), having total income of  
` 2,01,00,000 for the Assessment Year 2024-25. Assume that his total income 
comprises of salary income, Income from house property and interest on fixed deposit. 
Assume that Mr. C has exercised the option to shift out of section 115BAC. 
SOLUTION 
Computation of tax liability of Mr. C for the A.Y. 2024-25 
(A) 
Income-tax 
(including 
surcharge) 
computed 
on 
total 
income 
of  
` 2,01,00,000 
 
` 2,50,000 – ` 5,00,000 @ 5% 
` 12,500 
 
` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 @ 20% 
` 1,00,000 
 
` 10,00,001 – ` 2,01,00,000@30% 
 ` 57,30,000 
 
Total 
` 58,42,500 
 
Add: Surcharge @ 25% 
` 14,60,625 
` 73,03,125 
(B)  Income-tax computed on total income of ` 2 crore  
 
(` 12,500 plus ` 1,00,000 plus ` 57,00,000) 
 
` 58,12,500 
 
Add: Surcharge@15% 
 
    ` 8,71,875 
 
 
 
` 66,84,375 
(C) 
Total Income Less ` 2 crore 
 
` 1,00,000 
(D) 
Income-tax computed on total income of ` 2 crore plus the  
 
excess of total income over ` 2 crore (B +C) 
 
   ` 67,84,375 
(E) 
Tax liability (A) or (D), whichever is lower 
` 67,84,375 
 
Add: Health and education cess @4% 
 
    ` 2,71,375 
 
Tax liability (including cess) 
 
 ` 70,55,750 
(F) 
Marginal relief (A-D) 
 
` 5,18,750 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.73 
Alternative method 
(A) 
Income-tax 
(including 
surcharge) 
computed 
on 
total 
income 
of  
` 2,01,00,000 
 
` 2,50,000 – ` 5,00,000 @ 5% 
` 12,500 
 
` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 @ 20% 
` 1,00,000 
 
` 10,00,001 – ` 2,01,00,000@30% 
 ` 57,30,000 
 
Total 
` 58,42,500 
 
Add: Surcharge@25% 
` 14,60,625 
` 73,03,125 
(B)  
Income-tax computed on total income of ` 2 crore 
 
[(` 12,500 plus ` 1,00,000 plus ` 57,00,000) 
 plus surcharge@15%] 
 
` 66,84,375 
(C) 
Excess tax payable (A)-(B) 
 
` 6,18,750 
(D) 
Marginal Relief (` 6,18,750 – ` 1,00,000, being the amount 
 
of income in excess of ` 2,00,00,000) 
 
` 5,18,750 
(E) 
Tax liability (A) - (D) 
` 67,84,375 
 
Add: Health and education cess@4% 
 
    ` 2,71,375 
 
Tax liability (including cess) 
 
 ` 70,55,750 
ILLUSTRATION 8 
Compute the tax liability of Mr. D (aged 65) in a most beneficial manner. He is having 
total income of ` 5,01,00,000 for the Assessment Year 2024-25. Assume that his total 
income comprises of salary income, Income from house property and interest on fixed 
deposit and is the same under both tax regimes. 
SOLUTION 
Computation of tax liability of Mr. D under default tax regime  
for the A.Y. 2024-25 
Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of ` 5,01,00,000 
` 3,00,000 – ` 6,00,000@5% 
` 15,000 
` 6,00,001 – ` 9,00,000@10% 
` 30,000 
` 9,00,001 – ` 12,00,000@15% 
` 45,000 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.74 
` 12,00,001 – ` 15,00,000@20% 
` 60,000 
` 15,00,001 – ` 5,01,00,000@30% 
` 1,45,80,000 
Total  
` 1,47,30,000 
Add: Surcharge@25% 
       ` 36,82,500 
` 1,84,12,500 
Add: Health and education cess @4% 
 
        ` 7,36,500 
Tax liability 
 
 ` 1,91,49,000 
Computation of tax liability of Mr. D under optional tax regime  
for the A.Y. 2024-25 
(A) 
Income-tax 
(including 
surcharge) 
computed 
on 
total 
income 
of  
` 5,01,00,000 
 
` 3,00,000 – ` 5,00,000 @ 5% 
` 10,000 
 
` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 @ 20% 
` 1,00,000 
 
` 10,00,001 – ` 5,01,00,000@30% 
 ` 1,47,30,000 
 
Total 
` 1,48,40,000 
 
Add: Surcharge @ 37% 
` 54,90,800 
` 2,03,30,800 
(B)  Income-tax computed on total income of ` 5 crore  
 
(` 10,000 plus ` 1,00,000 plus ` 1,47,00,000) 
 
` 1,48,10,000 
 
Add: Surcharge@25% 
 
       ` 37,02,500 
 
 
 
` 1,85,12,500 
(C) 
Total Income Less ` 5 crore 
 
` 1,00,000 
(D) 
Income-tax computed on total income of ` 5 crore plus the  
 
excess of total income over ` 5 crore (B +C) 
 
` 1,86,12,500 
(E) 
Tax liability (A) or (D), whichever is lower 
 
` 1,86,12,500 
 
Add: Health and education cess@4% 
 
        ` 7,44,500 
 
Tax liability (including cess) 
 
` 1,93,57,000 
(F) 
Marginal Relief (A – D) 
` 17,18,300 
 
 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.75 
Alternative method 
(A) 
Income-tax 
(including 
surcharge) 
computed 
on 
total 
income 
of  
` 5,01,00,000 
 
` 3,00,000 – ` 5,00,000@5% 
` 10,000 
 
` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000@20% 
` 1,00,000 
 
` 10,00,001 – ` 5,01,00,000@30% 
` 1,47,30,000 
 
Total 
` 1,48,40,000 
 
Add: Surcharge @ 37% 
  ` 54,90,800 
` 2,03,30,800 
(B)  Income-tax computed on total income of ` 5 crore 
 
[(` 10,000 plus ` 1,00,000 plus ` 1,47,00,000)  
plus surcharge@25%] 
 
` 1,85,12,500 
(C) 
Excess tax payable (A)-(B) 
 
` 18,18,300 
(D) 
Marginal Relief (` 18,18,300 – ` 1,00,000, being the amount 
 
of income in excess of ` 5,00,00,000) 
 
` 17,18,300 
(E) 
Tax liability (A) - (D) 
 
` 1,86,12,500 
 
Add: Health and education cess @4% 
 
        ` 7,44,500 
 
Tax liability (including cess) 
 
 ` 1,93,57,000 
It is beneficial for Mr. D to pay tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC, 
since his tax liability would be lower by ` 2,08,000 (` 1,93,57,000 -  
` 1,91,49,000). 
6.2 Firm/ LLP/ Local Authority 
Income-tax 
On the whole of the total income  
 
 
30%  
Special rates for capital gains under sections 112, 112A and 111A would be 
applicable to Firm/ LLP/ local authority also.  
Surcharge 
Where the total income exceeds ` 1 crore, surcharge is payable at the rate of 12% 
of income-tax computed as above. 
 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.76 
Marginal Relief 
Marginal relief is available in case of such persons having a total income exceeding 
` 1 crore i.e., the total amount of income-tax (together with surcharge) computed 
on such income should not exceed the amount of income-tax computed on total 
income of ` 1 crore by more than the amount of income that exceeds ` 1 crore. 
6.3 Co-operative Society 
Income-tax rates as per the normal provisions of the Act 
(i) 
Where the total income does 
not exceed ` 10,000 
10% of the total income 
(ii) 
Where 
the 
total 
income 
exceeds ` 10,000 but does not 
exceed ` 20,000 
` 1,000 plus 20% of the amount by which 
the total income exceeds ` 10,000 
(iii) Where 
the 
total 
income 
exceeds ` 20,000 
3,000 plus 30% of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds ` 20,000 
Note – A manufacturing co-operative society, resident in India, can opt for concessional 
rates of tax under section 115BAE and other co-operative societies, resident in India, can 
opt for concessional rates of tax under section 115BAD. 
Tax rate in case of a manufacturing co-operative society, resident in India (set 
up and registered on or after 1.4.2023 and commences manufacture of article 
or thing  before 31.3.2024) opting for concessional tax regime u/s 115BAE 
15% of income derived from or incidental to manufacturing or production of an 
article or thing 
Tax rate in case of other resident co-operative society opting for concessional 
tax regime u/s 115BAD:  
22% of total income 
Note - Co-operative society, resident in India, can opt for concessional rate of tax u/s 
115BAD or 115BAE, as the case may be, subject to certain conditions. The total 
income of such co-operative societies would be computed without giving effect to 
deduction under section 10AA, 33AB, 33ABA, 35(1)(ii)/(iia)/(iii), 35(2AA), 35AD, 
35CCC, additional depreciation under section 32(1)(iia), deductions under Chapter 
VI-A (other than section 80JJAA) etc. and set off of loss and depreciation brought 
forward from earlier years relating to the above deductions. The provisions of 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.77 
alternate minimum tax under section 115JC would not be applicable to a co-
operative society opting for section 115BAD or 115BAE. This section will be dealt with 
in detail at Final level.  
Special rates for capital gains under sections 112, 112A and 111A would be 
applicable to Co-operative society also.  
Surcharge 
(a) 
In case of a co-operative society (other than a co-operative society 
opting for section 115BAD or section 115BAE), whose total income >  
` 1 crore but is ≤ ` 10 crore 
Where the total income exceeds ` 1 crore but does not exceed ` 10 crore, 
surcharge is payable at the rate of 7% of income-tax computed in accordance 
with the slab rates given above and/ or section 111A or section 112 or section 
112A.  
Marginal Relief 
Marginal relief is available in case of such co-operative societies i.e., the total 
amount of income-tax (together with surcharge) computed on such income 
should not exceed the amount of income-tax computed on total income of ` 
1 crore by more than the amount of income that exceeds ` 1 crore. 
(b) 
In case of a co-operative society (other than a co-operative society 
opting for section 115BAD or section 115BAE), whose total income is > 
` 10 crore 
Where the total income exceeds ` 10 crore, surcharge is payable at the rate of 
12% of income-tax computed in accordance with the slab rates given above 
and/ or section 111A or section 112 or section 112A.   
Marginal Relief 
Marginal relief is available in case of such co-operative societies i. e., the total 
amount of income-tax (together with surcharge) computed on such income 
should not exceed the amount of income-tax and surcharge computed on 
total income of ` 10 crore by more than the amount of income that exceeds 
` 10 crore. 
 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.78 
(c) 
In case of a co-operative society opting for section 115BAD or section 
115BAE 
Surcharge @10% of income-tax computed under section 115BAD or section 
115BAE would be leviable. Since there is no threshold limit for applicability 
of surcharge, consequently, there would be no marginal relief. 
6.4 Domestic Company 
Income-tax 
If the total turnover or gross receipt in the 
P.Y.2021-22 ≤ `  400 crore 
25% of the total income 
In any other case 
30% of the total income 
Notes  –  
• 
In case of a domestic manufacturing company (set up and registered 
on or after 1.10.2019 and commences manufacture of article or thing6 
before 31.3.2024) exercising option u/s 115BAB: 15% of income derived 
from or incidental to manufacturing or production of an article or thing 
• 
In case of a domestic company exercising option u/s 115BAA: 22% of 
total income 
Domestic company can opt for section 115BAA or section 115BAB, as the case 
may be, subject to certain conditions. The total income of such companies 
would be computed without giving effect to deductions under section 10AA, 
33AB, 33ABA, 35(1)(ii)/(iia)/(iii), 35(2AA), 35(2AB), 35AD, 35CCC, 35CCD, Chapter 
VI-A (except section 80JJAA or section 80M), additional depreciation under 
section 32(1)(iia) etc. and without set-off of brought forward loss and 
unabsorbed depreciation attributable to such deductions. These sections will be 
dealt with in detail at Final Level. 
Special rates for capital gains under sections 112, 112A and 111A would be 
applicable to domestic company also.  
Surcharge 
(a) 
In case of a domestic company (other than a domestic company opting 
for section 115BAA or section 115BAB), whose total income > ` 1 crore 
but is ≤ ` 10 crore 
 
6Including business of generation of electricity 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.79 
Where the total income exceeds ` 1 crore but does not exceed ` 10 crore, 
surcharge is payable at the rate of 7% of income-tax computed in accordance 
with the rates given above. 
Marginal Relief 
Marginal relief is available in case of such companies i.e., the total amount of 
income-tax (together with surcharge) computed on such income should not 
exceed the amount of income-tax computed on total income of ` 1 crore by 
more than the amount of income that exceeds ` 1 crore. 
(b) 
In case of a domestic company (other than a domestic company opting 
for section 115BAA or section 115BAB), whose total income is > ` 10 
crore 
Where the total income exceeds ` 10 crore, surcharge is payable at the rate 
of 12% of income-tax computed in accordance with the rates given above.   
Marginal Relief 
Marginal relief is available in case of such companies i.e., the total amount of 
income-tax (together with surcharge) computed on such income should not 
exceed the amount of income-tax and surcharge computed on total income 
of ` 10 crore by more than the amount of income that exceeds ` 10 crore. 
(c) 
In case of a domestic company opting for section 115BAA or section 
115BAB 
Surcharge @10% of income-tax computed under section 115BAA or section 
115BAB would be leviable. Since there is no threshold limit for applicability 
of surcharge, consequently, there would be no marginal relief. 
6.5 Foreign Company 
Income-tax 
Royalties and fees for rendering technical services (FTS) received from 
Government or an Indian concern in pursuance of an agreement, 
approved by the Central Government, made by the company with the 
Government or Indian concern between 1.4.1961 and 31.3.1976 (in case 
of royalties) and between 1.3.1964 and 31.3.1976 (in case of FTS) 
50% 
Other income 
40% 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.80 
Special rates for capital gains under sections 112, 112A and 111A would be 
applicable to foreign company also.   
Surcharge 
(a) 
In case of a foreign company, whose total income > ` 1 crore but is ≤  
` 10 crore 
Where the total income exceeds ` 1 crore but does not exceed ` 10 crore, 
surcharge is payable at the rate of 2% of income-tax computed in accordance 
with the rates given above.   
Marginal Relief 
Marginal relief is available in case of such companies i.e., the total amount of 
income-tax (together with surcharge) computed on such income should not 
exceed the amount of income-tax computed on total income of ` 1 crore by 
more than the amount of income that exceeds ` 1 crore. 
(b) 
In case of a foreign company, whose total income is > ` 10 crore 
Where the total income exceeds ` 10 crore, surcharge is payable at the rate 
of 5% of income-tax computed in accordance with the rates given above. 
Marginal Relief 
Marginal relief is available in case of such companies i.e., the total amount of 
income-tax (together with surcharge) computed on such income should not 
exceed the amount of income-tax and surcharge computed on total income 
of ` 10 crore by more than the amount of income that exceeds ` 10 crore. 
 7. REBATE 
FOR 
RESIDENT 
INDIVIDUALS  
[SECTION 87A] 
In order to provide tax relief to the individual tax payers, section 87A provides a 
rebate from the tax payable by an assessee, being an individual resident in India. 
Rebate to resident individual paying tax under default tax regime u/s 115BAC 
(i) 
If total income of such individual does not exceed ` 7,00,000, the rebate shall 
be equal to the amount of income-tax payable on his total income for any 
assessment year or an amount of ` 25,000, whichever is less.  
The amount of rebate under section 87A shall not exceed the amount of 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.81 
income-tax (as computed before allowing such rebate) on the total income of 
the assessee with which he is chargeable for any assessment year. 
ILLUSTRATION 9 
Mr. Raghav aged 26 years and a resident in India, has a total income of  
` 6,50,000, comprising his salary income and interest on bank fixed deposit. 
Compute his tax liability for A.Y.2024-25 under default tax regime under 
section 115BAC. 
SOLUTION 
   Computation of tax liability of Mr. Raghav for A.Y. 2024-25 
 
 
Particulars 
` 
Tax on total income of ` 6,50,000 
 
Tax@10%of ` 50,000 + ` 15,000 
20,000 
Less: Rebate u/s 87A (Lower of tax payable or ` 25,000) 
20,000 
Tax Liability 
    Nil 
(ii) 
If total income of such individual exceeds ` 7,00,000 and income-tax payable 
on such total income exceeds the amount by which the total income is in excess 
of ` 7,00,000, the rebate would be as follows. 
Step 1 – Total income (-) ` 7 lakhs (A) 
Step 2 - Compute income-tax liability on total income (B) 
Step 3 - If B>A, rebate under section 87A would be a B – A.  
The amount of rebate under section 87A shall not exceed the amount of 
income-tax (as computed before allowing such rebate) on the total income of 
the assessee. 
ILLUSTRATION 10 
Mr. Pawan aged 35 years and a resident in India, has a total income of  
` 7,15,000, comprising his salary income and interest on bank fixed deposit. 
Compute his tax liability for A.Y.2024-25 under default tax regime under 
section 115BAC. 
 
 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.82 
SOLUTION 
   Computation of tax liability of Mr. Pawan for A.Y. 2024-25 
 
 
Particulars 
` 
 
Step 1: Total Income of ` 7,15,000 - ` 7,00,000 
15,000 
(A) 
Step 2: Tax on total income of ` 7,15,000 
 
 
             Tax@10%of ` 1,15,000 + ` 15,000 
26,500 
(B) 
Step 3: Since B>A, rebate u/s 87A would be B-A 
 
    [` 26,500 - ` 15,000] 
 
11,500 
 
              
15,000 
 
Add: HEC@4% 
    600 
 
Tax Liability 
15,600 
 
Rebate to a resident individual paying tax under optional tax regime (normal 
provisions of the Act) 
If total income of such individual does not exceed ` 5,00,000, the rebate shall be 
equal to the amount of income-tax payable on his total income for any assessment 
year or an amount of ` 12,500, whichever is less. 
The amount of rebate under section 87A shall not exceed the amount of income-tax 
(as computed before allowing such rebate) on the total income of the assessee with 
which he is chargeable for any assessment year. 
ILLUSTRATION 11 
Mr. Piyush, aged 35 years and a resident in India, has a total income of ` 4,15,000, 
comprising his salary income and interest on bank fixed deposit. Compute his tax liability 
for A.Y.2024-25 if he exercises the option to shift out of the default tax regime. 
SOLUTION 
Computation of tax liability of Mr. Piyush for A.Y. 2024-25 
 
 
Particulars 
` 
Tax on total income of ` 4,15,000 
 
Tax@5%of ` 1,65,000  
8,250 
Less: Rebate u/s 87A (Lower of tax payable or ` 12,500) 
8,250 
Tax Liability 
Nil 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.83 
• 
Rebate under section 87A is allowed from income-tax computed 
before adding Health and education cess on income-tax. 
• 
Rebate under section 87A is, however, not available in respect of 
tax payable @10% on long-term capital gains taxable u/s 112A. 
8. 
PARTIAL INTEGRATION OF AGRICULTURAL 
INCOME 
WITH 
NON-AGRICULTURAL 
INCOME 
Agricultural income is exempt subject to conditions mentioned in the definition 
given under section 2(1A). However, a method has been laid down to levy tax on 
agricultural income in an indirect way. This concept is known as partial integration 
of agricultural income with non-agricultural income. It is applicable to 
individuals, HUF, AOPs, BOIs and artificial juridical persons. Two conditions which 
need to be satisfied for partial integration are:  
1. 
The net agricultural income should exceed ` 5,000 p.a., and 
2. 
Non-agricultural income should exceed the maximum amount not chargeable 
to tax. (i.e., If such person is paying tax under default tax regime u/s 115BAC, 
then ` 3,00,000 is the basic exemption limit irrespective of the age of the 
person. If such person has exercised the option to shift out of the default tax 
regime, then, the basic exemption limit would be ` 5,00,000 for resident 
individuals of the age of 80 years or more at any time during the previous 
year, ` 3,00,000 for resident individuals of the age of 60 years or more (but 
less than 80 years) at any time during the previous year and  
` 2,50,000 for all others). Only if non-agricultural income exceeds this limit, 
partial integration would be required. 
It may be noted that aggregation provisions do not apply to company, LLP, firm, 
co-operative society and local authority. The object of aggregating the net 
agricultural income with non-agricultural income is to tax the non-agricultural 
income at higher rates. 
Tax calculation in such cases is as follows: 
Step 1:
 
 
Add non-agricultural income with net agricultural income. Compute tax 
on the aggregate amount. 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.84 
Step 2:
 
 
Add net agricultural income and the basic exemption limit available to 
the assessee. Compute tax on the aggregate amount. 
Step 3: 
Deduct the amount of income tax calculated in step 2 from the income 
tax calculated in step 1 i.e., Step 1 – Step 2. 
Step4:
 
 
The sum so arrived at shall be – 
- 
increased by surcharge, if applicable, 
- 
reduced by the rebate, if any, available u/s 87A.  
Step 5: 
Thereafter, it would be increased by health and education cess @4%. 
The above concept can be clearly understood with the help of the following 
illustration: 
 
 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.85 
 
LET US RECAPITULATE 
Income-tax is the most significant direct tax. Entry 82 of the Union List i.e., 
List I of Seventh Schedule to Article 246 of the Constitution of India has given 
the power to Parliament to make laws on taxes on income other than 
agricultural income. 
Components of income-tax law 
• 
Income-tax Act, 1961 – governs the levy of income-tax in India. 
• 
Income-tax Rules, 1962 – formulated for proper administration of the Act. 
• 
Annual Finance Act – Amendments in the Income-tax Act, 1961 are 
effected every year through the Annual Finance Act. 
• 
Circulars – issued by CBDT to clarify the meaning and scope of certain 
provisions of the Act. 
• 
Notifications – issued to give effect to the provisions of the Act/ make or 
amend Rules. 
• 
Court decisions – interprets the various provisions of income-tax law. 
Income-tax is a TAX levied on the TOTAL INCOME of the PREVIOUS YEAR of 
every PERSON.  
(1) 
Total Income: Total income has to be computed as per the provisions 
contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961. The following steps has to be followed 
for computing the total income of an assessee: 
Step 1 – Determination of residential status 
Step 2 – Classification of income under different heads 
Step 3 – Computation of income under each head after providing for 
permissible deductions/ exemptions.  
In this step, it is necessary to consider whether the individual is paying tax under 
the default tax regime or exercising the option to shift out of the default tax 
regime and pay tax under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions 
of the Act. Certain deductions which are allowable under the normal provisions 
of the Act are not permissible under the default tax regime. 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.86 
Step 4 – Clubbing of income of spouse, minor child etc. 
Step 5 – Set-off or carry forward and set-off of losses 
Step 6 – Computation of Gross Total Income 
Step 7 – Providing Deductions from Gross Total Income 
Here again, only very select deductions, namely, 80CCD(2), 80CCH(2) and 
80JJAA, are allowable under the default tax regime under section 115BAC. 
Step 8 – Computation of Total income 
Step 9 - Application of the rates of tax on the total income 
For default tax regime, concessional tax rates are provided under section 
115BAC. For optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act, the 
tax rates are provided in the Annual Finance Act. The special rates u/s 111A, 
112, 112A, 115BB, 115BBJ, etc. would apply under both tax regimes. 
Step 10 – Add Surcharge, if applicable/ Deduct Rebate under section 87A, if 
applicable 
Step 11 – Add Health and education cess on income-tax 
Step 12 – Compute Alternate Minimum Tax (AMT), if applicable, [under the 
optional tax regime] 
Step 13 - Examine whether to pay tax under default tax regime under section 
115BAC or pay tax under the regular provisions of the Act, by comparing the 
tax liability under both regimes. 
Step 14 – Deduct Advance tax and tax deducted/ collected at source 
Step 15 – The resultant figure would be Tax Payable/Tax Refundable 
(2) 
Person: A person includes an individual, Hindu Undivided Family (HUF), 
Association of Persons (AOP), Body of Individuals (BOI), a firm, a company etc. 
(3) 
Concept of Previous year (P.Y.) and Assessment Year (A.Y.): Previous 
year is the financial year immediately preceding the assessment year i.e., it is 
the financial year ending on 31st March, in which the income has 
accrued/received.  
In case of a newly set-up business, the previous year would be the period 
beginning with the date of setting up of the business or profession or, as the 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.87 
case may be, the date on which the source of income newly came into existence, 
and ending on 31st March.   
Assessment year (A.Y.): Assessment year means the period of twelve months 
commencing on the 1st April every year.  
Exceptions to the rule that income is charged to income-tax in the 
Assessment Year following the previous year:  
The income of an assessee for a previous year is charged to income-tax in the 
assessment year following the previous year. However, in the following cases, 
this rule does not apply and the income is taxed in the previous year in which 
it is earned. 
(i) 
Shipping business of non-resident [Section 172] 
(ii) 
Persons leaving India [Section 174] 
(iii) 
AOP/BOI/Artificial Juridical Person formed for a particular event or 
purpose [Section 174A] 
(iv)  Persons likely to transfer property to avoid tax [Section 175] 
(v) 
Discontinued business [Section 176] 
Rate of tax for Undisclosed Sources of Income: The following undisclosed 
incomes are chargeable to tax @78% [i.e., 60% plus surcharge @25% plus cess 
@4%] as specified under section 115BBE: 
(i)  
Cash Credits [Section 68] 
(ii)  
Unexplained Investments [Section 69] 
(iii)  Unexplained money etc. [Section 69A] 
(iv)  Amount of investments etc., not fully disclosed in the books of account 
[Section 69B] 
(v)  
Unexplained expenditure [Section 69C] 
(vi)  Amount borrowed or repaid on hundi [Section 69D] 
(4) 
Tax liability: Tax has to be computed by applying the rates of tax 
mentioned in the Annual Finance Act and the rate specified under the Income-
tax Act, 1961, as the case may be. 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.88 
If an Individual/ Hindu Undivided Family (HUF)/ Association of Persons (AOP)/ 
Body of Individuals (BOI)/ Artificial Juridical Person is paying tax under default 
tax regime, concessional tax rates are prescribed under section 115BAC. 
However, if he/it exercises the option to shift out of the default tax regime, tax 
rates prescribed by the Annual Finance Act of that year would apply. 
Persons 
Rate of taxes 
Individual/HUF/ 
AOP/BOI/ Artificial 
Juridical Person 
(Under default tax 
regime) 
Total income (in `) 
Rate of Tax 
Upto ` 3,00,000 
Nil 
` 3,00,001 to ` 6,00,000 
5% 
` 6,00,001 to ` 9,00,000 
10% 
` 9,00,001 to ` 12,00,000 
15% 
` 12,00,001 to ` 15,00,000 
20% 
Above ` 15,00,000 
30% 
Individual (As per 
the 
normal 
provisions of the 
Act 
under 
the 
optional 
tax 
regime) 
Total income (in `) 
Rate of Tax 
(i) Upto ` 2,50,000 (below 60 years) 
(ii) Upto ` 3,00,000 (60 years or 
above but less than 80 years and 
resident in India)  
(iii) Upto ` 5,00,000 (above 80 years 
and resident in India) 
Nil 
` 2,50,001/ ` 3,00,001, as the case 
may be, to ` 5,00,000 [in cases (i) and 
(ii) above, respectively] 
5% 
` 5,00,001 to ` 10,00,000 
20% 
Above ` 10,00,000 
30% 
HUF/AOP/BOI/ 
Artificial Juridical 
Person 
(As per the normal 
provisions of the 
Act 
under 
the 
optional 
tax 
regime) 
 
Total income (in `) 
Rate of Tax 
Upto ` 2,50,000 
Nil 
` 2,50,001 to ` 5,00,000 
5% 
` 5,00,001 to ` 10,00,000 
20% 
Above ` 10,00,000 
30% 
 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.89 
Firm/LLP/local 
authority 
30% 
Co-operative 
Society (not opting 
for the provisions 
of section 115BAD 
or section 115BAE) 
 
Total income (in `) 
Rate of Tax 
Upto ` 10,000 
10% 
` 10,001 to ` 20,000 
20% 
Above ` 20,000 
30% 
 
Company 
(not 
opting 
for 
the 
provisions 
of 
section 
115BAA/115BAB) 
Domestic Company 
Foreign 
Company 
Total  turnover or 
gross receipts in the 
P.Y. 2021-22 ≤  
` 400 crore 
Other 
domestic 
companies 
 
25% 
30% 
40% 
Surcharge 
Under the default tax regime 
Individual/ HUF/ AOP (other than an AOP consisting of only companies 
as members)/ BOI/ Artificial juridical person 
(i) 
Where the total income (including dividend income and 
capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > 
` 50 lakh but is ≤ ` 1 crore 
10% 
(ii) 
Where the total income (including dividend income and 
capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A)> 
` 1 crore but is ≤ ` 2 crore 
15% 
(iii) - 
Where the total income (excluding dividend income 
and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 
112A)> ` 2 crore  
- 
Rate of surcharge on the income-tax payable on the 
portion 
of 
dividend 
income 
and capital 
gains 
chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A 
25% 
 
 
Not 
exceeding 
15% 
(iv) Where the total income (including dividend income and 
capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > 
` 2 crore in cases not covered in (iii) above 
15% 
 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.90 
Under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act 
Individual/ HUF/ AOP (other than an AOP consisting of only companies 
as members)/ BOI/ Artificial juridical person 
(i) 
Where the total income (including dividend income and 
capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > 
` 50 lakh but is ≤ ` 1 crore 
10% 
(ii) 
Where the total income (including dividend income and 
capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A)> 
` 1 crore but is ≤ ` 2 crore 
15% 
(iii) - 
Where the total income (excluding dividend income 
and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 
112A)> ` 2 crore but is ≤ ` 5 crore 
- 
Rate of surcharge on the income-tax payable on the 
portion of dividend income and capital gains 
chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A 
25% 
 
 
Not 
exceeding 
15% 
(iv) - 
Where the total income (excluding dividend income 
and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 
112A)> ` 5 crore 
- 
Rate of surcharge on the income-tax payable on the 
portion of dividend income and capital gains 
chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A. 
37% 
 
 
Not 
exceeding 
15% 
(v) 
Where the total income (including dividend income and 
capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > 
` 2 crore in cases not covered in (iii) and (iv) above 
15% 
 
In case of an AOP of only companies as members 
 
(i) 
Where the total income > ` 50 lakh but is < ` 1 crore 
10% 
(ii) 
Where the total income > ` 1 crore 
15% 
Firm/Limited Liability Partnership/Local Authorities 
Where the total income > ` 1 crore 
12% 
Co-operative societies (other than a co-operative society opting for 
section 115BAD or section 115BBE) 
Total income > ` 1 crore but is ≤ ` 10 crore 
7% 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.91 
Total income is > ` 10 crore 
12% 
Domestic company (other than a domestic company opting for section 
115BAA or section 115BAB) 
Total income > ` 1 crore but is ≤ ` 10 crore 
7% 
Total income is > ` 10 crore 
12% 
Foreign company 
Total income > ` 1 crore but is ≤ ` 10 crore 
2% 
Total income is > ` 10 crore 
5% 
Rebate under section 87A:  
Under default tax regime 
(i) Where total income ≤ ` 7,00,000 - Rebate of up to ` 25,000 for resident 
individuals. 
(ii) Where total income > ` 7,00,000 and income-tax payable on such total 
income exceeds the amount by which the total income is in excess of  
` 7,00,000 - Rebate of tax on total income as reduced by the total income 
exceeding ` 7,00,000 for resident individuals. 
Under normal provisions of the Act 
Rebate of up to ` 12,500 for resident individuals having total income of up to 
` 5 lakh. 
“Health and Education cess” on Income-tax: 4% of income-tax and 
surcharge, if applicable 
Agricultural income is exempt under section 10(1). 
However, agricultural income has to be aggregated with non-agricultural 
income for determining the rate at which non-agricultural income would be 
subject to tax, in case of individuals, HUF, AOPs & BOIs etc., where the – 
• 
agricultural income exceeds ` 5,000 p.a. and  
• 
non-agricultural income exceeds basic exemption limit. 
The following are the steps to be followed in computation of tax- 
Step  1:  Tax on non-agricultural income plus agricultural income 
Step  2:  Tax on agricultural income plus basic exemption limit 
Step  3:  Tax payable by the assessee = Step 1 – Step 2 
Step 4:  Add Surcharge/Deduct Rebate u/s 87A, if applicable. 
Step 5:   Add Health and Education Cess@4%. 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.92 
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
1. 
Who is an “Assessee”?  Explain 
2. 
State any four instances where the income of the previous year is assessable in 
the previous year itself instead of the assessment year. 
 
3. 
Whether the income derived from saplings or seedlings grown in a nursery is 
taxable under the Income-tax Act, 1961? Examine. 
4. 
What are the two schools of Hindu law and where are they prevalent? Explain. 
Also, mention the difference between the two schools of Hindu Law. 
5. 
What is the difference between an Association of Persons and Body of 
Individuals? 
6. 
Mr. Sumit, a resident Indian, earns income of ` 15 lakhs from sale of rubber 
manufactured from latex obtained from rubber plants grown by him in India 
and ` 20 lakhs from sale of rubber manufactured from latex obtained from 
rubber plants grown by him in Malaysia during the A.Y.2024-25. What would 
be his business income, assuming he has no other business? 
7. 
Mr. Raja, a resident Indian, earns income of ` 10 lakhs from sale of coffee grown 
and cured in India during the A.Y.2024-25. His friend, Mr. Shyam, a resident 
Indian, earns income of ` 20 lakhs from sale of coffee grown, cured, roasted 
and grounded by him in India during the A.Y.2024-25. What would be the 
business income chargeable to tax in India of Mr. Raja and Mr. Shyam? 
8. 
The Jain HUF in Assam comprises of Mr. Suresh Jain, his wife Mrs. Sapna Jain, 
his son Mr. Sarthak Jain, his daughter-in-law Mrs. Preeti Jain, his daughter Miss 
Seema Jain and his unmarried brother Mr. Pritam Jain.  Which of the members 
of the HUF are eligible for coparcenary rights? 
9.  
Compute the tax liability under default tax regime of Mr. Kashyap (aged 35), 
having total income of ` 51,75,000 for the Assessment Year 2024-25. Assume 
that his total income comprises of salary income, income from house property 
and interest on fixed deposit.  
10. 
Mr. Agarwal, aged 40 years and a resident in India, has a total income of  
` 6,50,00,000, comprising long term capital gain taxable under section 112 of 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.93 
` 55,00,000, short term capital gain taxable under section 111A of  
` 65,00,000 and other income of ` 5,30,00,000. Compute his tax liability for 
A.Y.2024-25 under the default tax regime and optional tax regime as per the 
normal provisions of the Act assuming that the total income and its 
components are the same in both tax regimes.  
11. 
Mr. Sharma aged 62 years and a resident in India, has a total income of  
` 2,30,00,000, comprising long term capital gain taxable under section 112 of 
` 52,00,000, short term capital gain taxable under section 111A of  
` 64,00,000 and other income of ` 1,14,00,000. Compute his tax liability for 
A.Y.2024-25 under the default tax regime and optional tax regime as per the 
normal provisions of the Act assuming that the total income and its 
components are the same in both tax regimes.  
ANSWERS 
1. 
As per section 2(7), assessee means a person by whom any tax or any other 
sum of money is payable under the Income-tax Act, 1961.   
In addition, the term includes – 
▪ 
Every person in respect of whom any proceeding under the Act has 
been taken for the assessment of – 
• 
his income; or  
• 
the income of any other person in respect of which he is 
assessable; or 
• 
the loss sustained by him or by such other person; or 
• 
the amount of refund due to him or to such other person. 
▪ 
Every person who is deemed to be an assessee under any provision of 
the Act; 
▪ 
Every person who is deemed to be an assessee in default under any 
provision of the Act. 
2. 
The income of an assessee for a previous year is charged to income-tax in the 
assessment year following the previous year. However, in a few cases, the 
income is taxed in the previous year in which it is earned. These exceptions 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.94 
have been made to protect the interests of revenue. The exceptions are as 
follows: 
(i) 
Where a ship, belonging to or chartered by a non-resident, carries 
passengers, livestock, mail or goods shipped at a port in India, the ship 
is allowed to leave the port only when the tax has been paid or 
satisfactory arrangement has been made for payment thereof. 7.5% of 
the freight paid or payable to the owner or the charterer or to any 
person on his behalf, whether in India or outside India on account of 
such carriage is deemed to be his income which is charged to tax in the 
same year in which it is earned. 
(ii) 
Where it appears to the Assessing Officer that any individual may leave 
India during the current assessment year or shortly after its expiry and 
he has no present intention of returning to India, the total income of 
such individual for the period from the expiry of the respective previous 
year up to the probable date of his departure from India is chargeable 
to tax in that assessment year. 
(iii) 
If an AOP/BOI etc. is formed or established for a particular event or 
purpose and the Assessing Officer apprehends that the AOP/BOI is 
likely to be dissolved in the same year or in the next year, he can make 
assessment of the income up to the date of dissolution as income of 
the relevant assessment year. 
(iv) 
During the current assessment year, if it appears to the Assessing 
Officer that a person is likely to charge, sell, transfer, dispose of or 
otherwise part with any of his assets to avoid payment of any liability 
under this Act, the total income of such person for the period from the 
expiry of the previous year to the date, when the Assessing Officer 
commences proceedings under this section is chargeable to tax in that 
assessment year. 
(v) 
Where any business or profession is discontinued in any assessment 
year, the income of the period from the expiry of the previous year up 
to the date of such discontinuance may, at the discretion of the 
Assessing Officer, be charged to tax in that assessment year. 
3. 
As per Explanation 3 to section 2(1A), income derived from saplings or 
seedlings grown in a nursery shall be deemed to be agricultural income and 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.95 
exempt from tax, whether or not the basic operations were carried out on 
land.  
4. 
The two schools of Hindu law are Dayabaga school, prevalent in West Bengal 
and Assam, and Mitakshara school, prevalent in rest of India.  
Under the Dayabaga school of Hindu Law, nobody acquires the right, share 
in the property by birth as long as the head of family is living. Thus, the 
children do not acquire any right, share in the family property, as long as his 
father is alive and only on death of the father, the children will acquire 
right/share in the property. Hence, the father and his brothers would be the 
coparceners of the HUF. 
Under the Mitakshara school of Hindu Law, one acquires the right to the 
family property by his birth and not by succession irrespective of the fact that 
his elders are living. Thus, every child born in the family acquires a right/share 
in the family property. 
5. 
In order to constitute an Association of Persons (AOP), persons must join for 
a common purpose or action and their object must be to produce income; it 
is not enough that the persons receive the income jointly.  
Body of Individuals denotes the status of persons like executors or trustees 
who merely receive the income jointly and who may be assessable in like 
manner and to the same extent as the beneficiaries individually. Thus, co-
executors or co-trustees are assessable as a BOI as their title and interest are 
indivisible.  
The difference between an AOP and BOI is that in case of a BOI, only 
individuals can be the members, whereas in case of AOP, any person can be 
its member i.e. entities like company, firm etc. can be the member of AOP but 
not of BOI.  
In case of an AOP, members voluntarily come together with a common will 
for a common intention or purpose, whereas in case of BOI, such common 
will may or may not be present. 
6. 
Since Mr. Sumit is a resident, his global income would be taxable in India. 
Income of ` 20 lakhs from sale of rubber manufactured from latex obtained 
from rubber plants grown by him in Malaysia would be his business income 
since it is from rubber plants grown outside India. 35% income from sale of 
rubber manufactured from latex obtained from rubber plants grown by him 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.96 
in India would be taxable as business income and balance 65% would be 
exempt as agricultural income. 
Business income  = 35% of ` 15 lakhs + ` 20 lakhs = ` 25.25 lakhs 
7. 
In case of income derived from the sale of coffee grown and cured by the 
seller in India, 25% income on such sale is taxable as business income. In case 
of income derived from the sale of coffee grown, cured, roasted and 
grounded by the seller in India, 40% income on such sale is taxable as 
business income.   
 
Business income of Mr. Raja = 25% of ` 10 lakhs = ` 2.5 lakhs 
 
Business income of Mr. Shyam = 40% of ` 20 lakhs = ` 8 lakhs 
8. 
Dayabaga school of Hindu law is prevalent in Assam. In Dayabaga school of 
Hindu law, nobody acquires the right, share in the property by birth as long 
as the head of family is living.  
Thus, the children do not acquire any right, share in the family property, as 
long as his father is alive and only on death of the father, the children will 
acquire right/share in the property.  
Hence, Mr. Suresh Jain and his brother, Mr. Pritam Jain would be the 
coparceners of the Jain HUF and are eligible for coparcenary rights. 
9. 
Computation of tax liability of Mr. Kashyap for the A.Y.2024-25 
under default tax regime 
(A)    Tax payable including surcharge on total income of ` 51,75,000 
 
` 3,00,000 – ` 6,00,000 @5% 
     ` 15,000 
 
` 6,00,001 – ` 9,00,000 @10% 
  ` 30,000 
 
` 9,00,001 – ` 12,00,000 @15% 
  ` 45,000 
 
` 12,00,001 – ` 15,00,000 @20% 
  ` 60,000 
 
` 15,00,001 – ` 51,75,000 @30% ` 11,02,500 
 
Total 
 
` 12,52,500 
 
Add: Surcharge @ 10% 
  ` 1,25,250 
` 13,77,750 
 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.97 
(B) 
Tax Payable on total income of ` 50 lakhs (` 1,50,000 plus  
 
` 10,50,000) 
 
` 12,00,000 
 
(C)    Total Income Less ` 50 lakhs 
 
` 1,75,000 
 
(D)   Tax payable on total income of ` 50 lakhs plus the  
 
excess of total income over ` 50 lakhs (B +C)  
` 13,75,000 
 
(E)    Tax payable: lower of (A) and (D) 
 
` 13,75,000 
 
Add: Health and education cess @4% 
 
      ` 55,000 
 
Tax liability 
 
` 14,30,000 
 
(F)    Marginal Relief (A – D) 
 
               ` 2,750 
 
Alternative method -  
 
(A)   Tax payable including surcharge on total income of ` 51,75,000 
 
` 3,00,000 – ` 6,00,000 @5% 
     ` 15,000 
 
` 6,00,001 – ` 9,00,000 @10% 
  ` 30,000 
 
` 9,00,001 – ` 12,00,000 @15% 
  ` 45,000 
 
` 12,00,001 – ` 15,00,000 @20% 
  ` 60,000 
 
` 15,00,001 – ` 51,75,000 @30% ` 11,02,500 
 
Total 
` 12,52,500 
 
Add: Surcharge@10% 
  ` 1,25,250 
` 13,77,750 
(B)     Tax Payable on total income of ` 50 lakhs (` 1,50,000 plus  
 
           ` 10,50,000) 
 
` 12,00,000 
 
(C)    Excess tax payable (A)-(B) 
 
  ` 1,77,750 
 
(D)    Marginal Relief (` 1,77,750 – ` 1,75,000, being the amount 
 
of income in excess of ` 50,00,000) 
 
               ` 2,750 
 
(E)     Tax payable (A)-(D) 
 
` 13,75,000 
 
Add: Health and education cess @4% 
 
      ` 55,000 
 
Tax liability 
 
` 14,30,000 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.98 
10.   
Computation of tax liability of Mr. Agarwal for the A.Y.2024-25 
under default tax regime  
 
 
Particulars 
` 
Tax on total income of ` 6,50,00,000 
 
Tax@20% of ` 55,00,000 
11,00,000 
Tax@15% of ` 65,00,000 
9,75,000 
Tax on other income of ` 5,30,00,000 
 
` 3,00,000 – ` 6,00,000 @5% 
15,000 
 
` 6,00,000 – ` 9,00,000 @10% 
30,000 
 
` 9,00,000 – ` 12,00,000 @15% 
45,000 
 
` 12,00,000 – ` 15,00,000 @20% 
60,000 
 
` 15,00,000 – ` 5,30,00,000 @30% 
1,54,50,000 
1,56,00,000 
 
1,76,75,000 
Add: Surcharge @15% on ` 20,75,000 
3,11,250 
 
        @25% on ` 1,56,00,000 
39,00,000 
42,11,250 
 
2,18,86,250 
Add: Health and education cess @4% 
8,75,450 
Tax Liability 
2,27,61,700 
Computation of tax liability of Mr. Agarwal for the A.Y.2024-25 
under normal provisions of the Act 
 
 
Particulars 
` 
Tax on total income of ` 6,50,00,000 
 
Tax@20% of ` 55,00,000 
11,00,000 
Tax@15% of ` 65,00,000 
9,75,000 
Tax on other income of ` 5,30,00,000 
 
` 2,50,000 – ` 5,00,000 @5% 
12,500 
 
` 5,00,000 – ` 10,00,000 @20% 
1,00,000 
 
` 10,00,000 – ` 5,30,00,000 @30% 
1,56,00,000 
1,57,12,500 

BASIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
1.99 
 
1,77,87,500 
Add: Surcharge @15% on ` 20,75,000 
3,11,250 
 
        @37% on ` 1,57,12,500 
58,13,625 
61,24,875 
 
2,39,12,375 
Add: Health and education cess @4% 
9,56,495 
Tax Liability 
2,48,68,870 
11.    
Computation of tax liability of Mr. Sharma for the A.Y.2024-25 
 
  
 
 
 
under default tax regime 
 
 
Particulars 
` 
Tax on total income of ` 2,30,00,000 
 
Tax@20% of ` 52,00,000 
10,40,000 
Tax@15% of ` 64,00,000 
9,60,000 
Tax on other income of ` 1,14,00,000 
 
` 3,00,000 – ` 6,00,000 @5% 
15,000 
 
` 6,00,000 – ` 9,00,000 @10% 
30,000 
 
` 9,00,000 – ` 12,00,000 @15% 
45,000 
 
` 12,00,000 – ` 15,00,000 @20% 
60,000 
 
` 15,00,000 – ` 1,14,00,000 @30% 
29,70,000 
31,20,000 
 
51,20,000 
Add: Surcharge @15% 
7,68,000 
 
58,88,000 
Add: Health and education cess @4% 
235,520 
Tax Liability 
61,23,520 
Computation of tax liability of Mr. Sharma for the A.Y.2024-25 
under normal provisions of the Act 
 
 
Particulars 
` 
Tax on total income of ` 2,30,00,000 
 
Tax@20% of ` 52,00,000 
10,40,000 

 
 
INCOME TAX LAW 
1.100 
Tax@15% of ` 64,00,000 
9,60,000 
Tax on other income of ` 1,14,00,000 
 
` 3,00,000 – ` 5,00,000 @5% 
10,000 
 
` 5,00,000 – ` 10,00,000 @20% 
1,00,000 
 
` 10,00,000 – ` 1,14,00,000 @30% 
31,20,000 
32,30,000 
 
52,30,000 
Add: Surcharge @15% 
7,84,500 
 
60,14,500 
Add: Health and education cess @4% 
2,40,580 
Tax Liability 
62,55,080 
 
