LEARNING OUTCOMES 
 
 
CHAPTER 
7 
 
ADVANCE 
TAX, 
TAX
DEDUCTION AT SOURCE
AND TAX COLLECTION 
AT SOURCE 
After studying this chapter, you would be able to– 

appreciate the modes of recovery of income-tax from an 
assessee; 

comprehend and apply the provisions governing deduction 
of tax at source from certain specified income and 
payments; 

examine whether tax is deductible in a particular case(s) 
considering the provisions of the relevant section; 

compute the tax deductible at source in respect of a 
particular case(s); 

identify the cases where tax is not required to be deducted 
at source and the conditions to be satisfied for this purpose; 

comprehend and appreciate the duty of the person 
deducting tax;  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
 
7.2 

examine the consequences of failure to deduct tax at 
source or make payment of the tax deducted at source; 

appreciate when the liability to pay advance tax arises; 

compute advance tax liability and the schedule of 
instalments for payment of advance tax; 

comprehend the concept of tax collection at source and 
appreciate when tax is collectible at source; 

appreciate the difference between tax deduction at source 
and tax collection at source. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.3 
 
 
 
Tax deduction 
at source
Deduction of tax at 
source 
[Section 192 to 196]
Certificate of 
deduction of tax at 
a lower rate
[Section 197]
No deduction of tax 
in certain cases
[Section 197A]
Miscellaneous 
Provisions
[Section 198 to 
206AB]
Advance Tax
Liability to pay 
advance tax 
[Section 207 to 208]
Computation of 
advance tax 
[Section 209]
Instalments of 
advance tax and due 
dates 
[Section 211]
Credit for advance 
tax 
[Section 219]
Interest on non-
payment / short 
payment or deferment 
of advance tax 
[Section 234B & 234C]
Tax collection 
at source
Collection of tax 
at source
[Section 206C]
TCS for non-
filers of income-
tax return and 
non-furnishers 
of PAN [Section 
206CCA & 
206CC]
Difference 
between TDS 
and TCS
Common 
Number for TDS 
and TCS 
[Section 203A]
CHAPTER OVERVIEW 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
7.4 
1.
DEDUCTION 
OF 
TAX 
AT 
SOURCE 
AND
ADVANCE PAYMENT [SECTION 190]
The total income of an assessee for the previous year is taxable in the relevant 
assessment year. For example, the total income for the P.Y. 2023-24 is taxable in 
the A.Y. 2024-25. However, income-tax is recovered from the assessee in the 
previous year itself through – 
(1)
Tax deduction at source (TDS)
(2)
Tax collection at source (TCS)
(3)
Payment of advance tax
Another mode of recovery of tax is from the employer through tax paid by him 
under section 192(1A) on the non-monetary perquisites provided to the 
employee. 
These taxes are deductible from the total tax due from the assessee. The assessee, 
while filing his return of income, has to pay self-assessment tax under section 
140A, if tax is due on the total income as per his return of income after adjusting, 
inter alia, TDS, TCS, relief of tax claimed under section 89, tax credit claimed to be 
set off in accordance with the provisions of section 115JD, in case assessee 
exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 
115BAC(1A), any tax or interest payable according to the provisions of section 
191(2) and advance tax.  
2.
DIRECT PAYMENT [SECTION 191]
Direct payment of tax - Section 191(1) provides that in the following cases, tax is 
payable by the assessee directly – 
(i)
in the case of income in respect of which tax is not required to be deducted
at source; and
(ii)
income in respect of which tax is liable to be deducted but is not actually
deducted.
In view of this provision, the proceedings for recovery of tax necessarily had to be 
taken against the assessee whose tax was liable to be deducted, but not 
deducted. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.5 
In order to overcome this difficulty, the Explanation to this section provides that if 
any person, including the principal officer of a company – 
(i) 
who is required to deduct tax at source; or  
(ii) 
an employer paying tax on non-monetary perquisites under section 192(1A),  
does not deduct, or after deducting fails to pay such tax, or does not pay, the 
whole or part of the tax, then, such person shall be deemed to be an assessee-in-
default. 
However, if the assessee himself has paid the tax, this provision will not apply.  
3. 
DEDUCTION OF TAX AT SOURCE 
3.1  Salary [Section 192] 
(1) 
Applicability of TDS under section 192 
 
This section casts an obligation on every person responsible for paying any 
income chargeable to tax under the head ‘Salaries’ to deduct income-tax at 
the time of payment on the amount payable. 
(2) 
Manner of deduction of tax 
(i)  
Such income-tax has to be calculated at the average rate of income-
tax computed on the basis of the rates in force for the relevant 
financial year in which the payment is made, on the estimated total 
income of the assessee where the employee intimates to the 
employer his intent to exercise the option of shifting out of the 
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).  
(ii) 
Average rate of income-tax means the rate arrived at by dividing the 
amount of income-tax calculated on the total income, by such total 
income. 
(iii) 
A deductor, being an employer, has to seek information from each of its 
employees having income under section 192 regarding their intended 
tax regime and each such employee would intimate the same to the 
deductor, being his employer, regarding his intended tax regime for 
each year and upon intimation, the deductor has to compute his total 
income, and deduct tax at source thereon according to the option 
exercised.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
 
7.6 
If intimation is not made by the employee, it would be presumed that 
the employee continues to be in the default tax regime u/s 115BAC and 
has not exercised the option to opt out of the default tax regime. 
Accordingly, in such a case, the employer has to deduct tax at source, 
on income under section 192, in accordance with the rates provided 
under section 115BAC(1A). 
It is also clarified that the intimation would not amount to exercising 
option under section 115BAC(6) and the person shall be required to do 
so separately in accordance with the provisions of that section [Circular 
No. 4/2023 dated 5.4.2023]. 
(iv) 
The concept of payment of tax on non-monetary perquisites has been 
provided in sections 192(1A) and (1B). These sections provide that the 
employer may pay this tax, at his option, in lieu of deduction of tax at 
source from salary payable to the employee. Such tax will have to be 
worked out at the average rate applicable to aggregate salary income 
of the employee and payment of tax will have to be made every 
month along with tax deducted at source on monetary payment of 
salary, allowances etc. 
ILLUSTRATION 1 
Mr. A, the employer, pays gross salary including allowances and 
monetary perquisites amounting to ` 7,30,000 to his General Manager. 
Besides, the employer provides non-monetary perquisites to him 
whose value is estimated at ` 1,20,000. The General Manager is 
exercising the option to shift out of the default tax regime and pay tax 
under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act. 
What is the tax implication in the hands of Mr. A, the employer and 
General Manager, the employee? 
SOLUTION 
 
`   
 
Gross salary, allowances and monetary perquisites  
7,30,000 
 
Non-Monetary perquisites 
 1,20,000 
 
 
  8,50,000 
 
Less: Standard deduction under section 16(ia) 
     50,000 
 
 
8,00,000 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
7.7 
Tax Liability  
75,400 
Average rate of tax (`  75,400 / `  8,00,000 × 100) 
    9.425% 
Mr. A can deduct ` 75,400 at source from the salary of the General 
Manager at the time of payment.  
Alternatively, Mr. A can pay tax on non-monetary perquisites as under – 
Tax on non-monetary perquisites = 9.425% of ` 1,20,000 = ` 11,310 
Balance to be deducted from salary = ` 64,090 
If Mr. A pays tax of ` 11,310 on non-monetary perquisites, the same is 
not a deductible expenditure as per section 40(a). The amount of tax 
paid towards non-monetary perquisite by the employer, however, is 
not chargeable to tax in the hands of the employee as per section 
10(10CC). 
(v)
In cases where an assessee is employed simultaneously under more
than one employer or the assessee takes up a job with another
employer during the financial year after his resignation or retirement
from the services of the former employer, he may furnish the details of
the income under the head “Salaries” due or received by him from the
other employer, the tax deducted therefrom and such other particulars
to his current employer. Thereupon, the subsequent employer should
take such information into consideration and then deduct the tax
remaining payable in respect of the employee’s remuneration from
both the employers put together for the relevant financial year.
(vi)
In respect of salary payments to employees of Government or to
employees of companies, co-operative societies, local authorities,
universities, institutions, associations or bodies, deduction of tax at
source should be made after allowing relief u/s 89(1), where eligible.
(vii)
A tax payer having salary income in addition to other income
chargeable to tax for that financial year, may send to the employer,
the following particulars of:
(a)
such other income and of any tax deducted under any other
provision;
(b)
loss, if any, under the head ‘Income from house property’ if the
assessee intimated to the employer his intent to exercise the
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
 
7.8 
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under 
section 115BAC(1A). 
 
The employer shall take the above particulars into account while 
calculating tax deductible at source. 
(viii) It is also provided that except in cases where loss from house property 
has been adjusted against salary income, the tax deductible from 
salary should not be reduced as a consequence of making the above 
adjustments. Loss from house property would be adjusted against salary 
where the assessee intimated to the employer his intent to exercise the 
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 
115BAC(1A). However, loss under the head “income from house 
property” shall be allowed to be set off against salary and income 
under any other head subject to maximum of ` 2,00,000.  
(3) 
Furnishing of statement of particulars of perquisites or profits in lieu of 
salary by employer to employee 
 
Sub-section (2C) provides that the employer shall furnish to the employee, a 
statement in Form No. 12BA giving correct and complete particulars of 
perquisites or profits in lieu of salary provided to him and the value thereof. 
The statement shall be in the prescribed form and manner. This requirement 
is applicable only where the salary paid/payable to an employee exceeds  
` 1,50,000. For other employees, the particulars of perquisites/profits in lieu 
of salary shall be given in Form 16 itself. 
(4) 
Circular issued by CBDT 
 
Every year, the CBDT issues a circular giving details and direction to all 
employers for the purpose of deduction of tax from salaries payable to the 
employees during the relevant financial year. These instructions should be 
followed. 
(5) 
Requirement to obtain evidence/ proof/ particulars of claims from the 
employee by the employer 
 
Sub-section (2D) casts responsibility on the person responsible for paying 
any income chargeable under the head “Salaries” to obtain from the 
assessee, the evidence or proof or particulars of prescribed claims (including 
claim for set-off of loss) under the provisions of the Act in the prescribed 
form and manner, for the purposes of – 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
7.9 
(1)
estimating income of the assessee; or
(2)
computing tax deductible under section 192(1).
In case an employee has intimated his employer of his intent to exercise the 
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 
115BAC(1A), Rule 26C requires furnishing of evidence of the following claims 
by him to the person responsible for making payment under section 192(1) in 
Form No.12BB for the purpose of estimating his income or computing the 
amount of tax to be deducted at source: 
S. 
No. 
Nature of Claim 
Evidence or particulars 
1. 
House Rent Allowance 
Name, address and PAN of the 
landlord(s) where the aggregate rent 
paid 
during 
the 
previous 
year 
exceeds ` 1 lakh. 
2. 
Leave Travel Concession 
or Assistance 
Evidence of expenditure 
3. 
Deduction 
of 
interest 
under the head “Income 
from house property” 
Name, address and PAN of the lender 
4. 
Deduction 
under 
Chapter VI-A 
Evidence 
of 
investment 
or 
expenditure. 
3.2 Interest on securities [Section 193] 
(1)
Person responsible for deduction of tax at source
This section casts responsibility on every person responsible for paying to a
resident any income by way of interest on securities.
(2)
Meaning of interest on securities [Section 2(28B)]
Interest on securities means -
(i)
interest on any security of the Central Government or a State
Government
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
 
7.10 
(ii) 
interest on debentures or other securities for money issued by or on 
behalf of a local authority or a company or a corporation established 
by a Central, State or Provincial Act. 
(3) 
Rate of TDS 
 
Such person is vested with the responsibility to deduct income-tax at the 
rates in force from the amount of interest payable.  
 
The rate at which tax is deductible under section 193 is 10%, both in the 
case of domestic companies and non-corporate resident assessees. 
(4) 
Time of tax deduction at source 
 
Tax should be deducted at the time of credit of such income to the account 
of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue of a 
cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier. 
 
Where any income by way of interest on securities is credited to any 
account in the books of account of the person liable to pay such income, 
such crediting is deemed to be credit of such income to the account of the 
payee and tax has to be deducted at source. The account to which such 
interest is credited may be called “Interest Payable account” or “Suspense 
account” or by any other name. 
(5) 
Non-applicability of TDS under section 193 
 
No tax deduction is to be made from any interest payable: 
(i) 
on National Development Bonds; 
(ii) 
on 7-year National Savings Certificates (IV Issue); 
(iii) 
on debentures issued by any institution or authority or any public 
sector company or any co-operative society (including a co-operative 
land mortgage bank or a co-operative land development bank), as 
notified by the Central Government; 
Accordingly, the Central Government has, vide Notification No. 27 
& 28/2018, dated 18-06-2018, notified-  
(i)  “Power Finance Corporation Limited 54EC Capital Gains Bond” 
issued by Power Finance Corporation Limited {PFCL} and  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.11 
(ii)  “Indian Railway Finance Corporation Limited 54EC Capital Gains 
Bond” issued by Indian Railway Finance Corporation Limited 
{IRFCL}  
Thus, no tax is required to be deducted at source on interest payable 
on “Power Finance Corporation Limited 54EC Capital Gains Bond” and 
“Indian Railway Finance Corporation Limited 54EC Capital Gains Bond”. 
(iv) 
on any security of the Central Government or a State Government 
 
Note – It may be noted that tax has to be deducted at source in 
respect of interest payable on 8% Savings (Taxable) Bonds, 2003, or 
7.75% Savings (Taxable) Bonds, 2018, only if such interest payable 
exceeds ` 10,000 during the financial year. 
(v) 
on any debentures (whether listed or not listed on a recognized stock 
exchange) issued by the company in which the public are substantially 
interested to a resident individual or HUF. However, 
(a) 
the interest should be paid by the company by an account payee 
cheque; 
(b) 
the amount of such interest or the aggregate thereof paid or 
likely to be paid during the financial year by the company to 
such resident individual or HUF should not exceed ` 5,000. 
(vi) 
on securities to LIC, GIC, subsidiaries of GIC or any other insurer, 
provided – 
(a) 
the securities are owned by them or  
(b) 
they have full beneficial interest in such securities.  
3.3 Interest other than interest on securities [Section 194A] 
This section deals with the scheme of deduction of tax at source from interest 
other than interest on securities. The main provisions are the following: 
(1) 
Applicability of TDS under section 194A 
 
This section applies only to interest, other than “interest on securities”, 
credited or paid by assessees other than individuals or Hindu undivided 
family. However, an individual or Hindu undivided family whose total sales, 
gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on by him 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.12 
exceed ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession 
during the immediately preceding financial year is liable to deduct tax at 
source under this section. 
(2)
Time of tax deduction at source
The deduction of tax must be made at the time of crediting such interest to
the account of the payee or at the time of its payment in cash or by any
other mode, whichever is earlier.
Where any such interest is credited to any account in the books of account
of the person liable to pay such income, such crediting is deemed to be
credit of such income to the account of the payee and the tax has to be
deducted at source. The account to which such interest is credited may be
called “Interest Payable account” or “Suspense account” or by any other
name.
The CBDT has, vide Circular No.3/2010 dated 2.3.2010, given a clarification
regarding deduction of tax at source on payment of interest on time
deposits under section 194A by banks following Core-branch Banking
Solutions (CBS) software. It has been clarified that Explanation to section
194A is not meant to apply in cases of banks where credit is made to
provisioning account on daily/monthly basis for the purpose of macro
monitoring only by the use of CBS software. It has been further clarified that
since no constructive credit to the depositor’s/payee’s account takes place
while calculating interest on time deposits on daily or monthly basis in the
CBS software used by banks, tax need not be deducted at source on such
provisioning of interest by banks for the purposes of macro monitoring
only. In such cases, tax shall be deducted at source on accrual of interest at
the end of financial year or at periodic intervals as per practice of the bank
or as per the depositor's/ payee's requirement or on maturity or on
encashment of time deposits, whichever event takes place earlier, whenever
the aggregate of amounts of interest income credited or paid or likely to be
credited or paid during the financial year by the banks exceeds the limits
specified in section 194A.
Note - The time for making the payment of tax deducted at source would
reckon from the date of credit of interest made constructively to the
account of the payee.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.13 
(3) 
Rate of TDS 
The rate at which the deduction is to be made is given in Part II of the First 
Schedule to the Annual Finance Act. The rate at which tax is to be deducted 
is 10% both in the case of non-corporate resident assessees and domestic 
companies. 
(4) 
Non-applicability of TDS under section 194A 
 
No deduction of tax shall be made in the following cases: 
(a) 
If the aggregate amount of interest paid or credited during the 
financial year does not exceed ` 5,000. 
 
This limit is ` 40,000 where the payer is a – 
(i) 
banking company;   
(ii) 
a co-operative society engaged in banking business; and  
(iii) 
post office and interest is credited or paid in respect of any 
deposit under notified schemes. 
 
In respect of (i), (ii) and (iii) above, the limit is ` 50,000, in case of 
payee, being a senior citizen. 
 
The limit will be calculated with respect to income credited or paid by 
a branch of a banking company or a co-operative society or a public 
company in case of: 
(i) 
time deposits with a banking company 
(ii) 
time deposits with a co-operative society carrying on the 
business of banking; and 
(iii)  deposits with housing finance companies, provided: 
- 
they are public companies formed and registered in India 
- 
their main object is to carry on the business of providing 
long-term finance for construction or purchase of houses 
in India for residential purposes. 
 
The threshold limit will be reckoned with reference to the total interest 
credited or paid by the banking company or the co-operative society 
or the public company, as the case may be, (and not with reference to 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
 
7.14 
each branch), where such banking company or co-operative society or 
public company has adopted core banking solutions. 
Section 206A requires every banking company or co-operative society 
or public company referred to in above to prepare such statement, for 
such period as may be prescribed  
- if they are responsible for paying to a resident, 
- the payment should be of any income not exceeding ` 40,000, 
where the payer is a banking company or a co-operative society, 
and ` 5,000 in any other case and 
- such income should be by way of interest (other than interest on 
securities) 
The statement should be in the prescribed form and should be 
delivered to the DGIT (Systems) or person authorized by him. 
(b) 
Interest paid or credited by a firm to any of its partners; 
(c) 
Interest paid or credited in respect of deposits under any scheme 
framed by the Central Government and notified by it in this behalf; 
(d) 
Interest income credited or paid in respect of deposits (other than 
time deposits made on or after 1.7.1995) with a bank to which the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies; 
(e) 
Income paid or credited by a co-operative society (other than a co-
operative bank) to a member thereof or to such income credited or 
paid by a co-operative society to any other co-operative society; 
(f) 
Interest income credited or paid in respect of -  
(i) 
deposits with primary agricultural credit society or a primary 
credit society or a co-operative land mortgage bank or a co-
operative land development bank; 
(ii) 
deposit (other than time deposits made on or after 1.7.1995) 
with a co-operative society [other than cooperative society or 
bank referred to in (i)] engaged in carrying on the business of 
banking. 
From a combined reading of (e) and (f), it can be inferred that a co-
operative bank other than mentioned in (i) above is required to 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.15 
deduct tax at source on payment of interest on time deposit to its 
members. However, it is not required to deduct tax from the payment 
of interest on time deposit, to a depositor, being a co-operative 
society. 
 
However, a cooperative society referred to in (e) or (f) is liable to 
deduct tax if – 
(i) 
the total sales, gross receipts or turnover of the co-operative 
society exceeds ` 50 crore during the financial year immediately 
preceding the financial year in which interest is credited or paid; 
and 
(ii) 
the amount of interest or the aggregate amount of interest 
credited or paid, or is likely to be credited or paid, during the 
financial year is more than ` 50,000 in case of payee being a 
senior citizen and ` 40,000, in any other case. 
 
Thus, such co-operative society is required to deduct tax under 
section 194A on interest credited or paid by it – 
(a) 
to its member or to any other co-operative society; or  
(b) 
in respect of deposits with a primary agricultural credit society 
or a primary credit society or a co-operative land mortgage bank 
or a co-operative land development bank or  
(c) 
in respect of deposits with a co-operative bank other than a co-
operative society or bank engaged in carrying on the business of 
banking 
(g) 
Interest income credited or paid by the Central Government under any 
provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
(h) 
Interest paid or credited to the following entities: 
(i) 
banking companies, or co-operative societies engaged in the 
business of banking, including co-operative land mortgage 
banks; 
(ii) 
financial corporations established by or under any Central, State 
or Provincial Act. 
(iii) 
the Life Insurance Corporation of India. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
 
7.16 
(iv) 
companies and co-operative societies carrying on the business 
of insurance. 
(v) 
the Unit Trust of India; and 
(vi) 
notified institution, association, body or class of institutions, 
associations or bodies (National Skill Development Fund and 
Housing and Urban Development Corporation Ltd. (HUDCO), 
New Delhi have been notified by the Central Government for this 
purpose). 
(i) 
income credited by way of interest on the compensation amount 
awarded by the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal; 
(j) 
income paid by way of interest on the compensation amount awarded 
by the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal where the amount of such 
income or, as the case may be, the aggregate of the amounts of such 
income paid during the financial year does not exceed ` 50,000. 
(k) 
income paid or payable by an infrastructure capital company or 
infrastructure capital fund or infrastructure debt fund or public sector 
company or scheduled bank in relation to a zero coupon bond issued 
on or after 1.6.2005. 
Notes  
(1)  
The expression “time deposits” [for the purpose of (4)(a), (d) and (f) 
above] means the deposits, including recurring deposits, repayable 
on the expiry of fixed periods. 
(2) 
Senior citizen means an individual resident in India who is of the age 
of 60 years or more at any time during the relevant previous year.  
(5) 
Power to the Central Government to issue notification 
The Central Government is empowered to issue notification for non-
deduction of tax at source or deduction of tax at a lower rate, from such 
payment to such person or class of persons, specified in that notification. 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.17 
ILLUSTRATION 2 
Examine the TDS implications under section 194A in the cases mentioned 
hereunder– 
(i) 
On 1.10.2023, Mr. Harish made a six-month fixed deposit of ` 10 lakh@9% 
p.a. with ABC Co-operative Bank. The fixed deposit matures on 31.3.2024. 
(ii) 
On 1.6.2023, Mr. Ganesh made three nine months fixed deposits of ` 3 lakh 
each, carrying interest@9% p.a. with Dwarka Branch, Janakpuri Branch and 
Rohini Branch of XYZ Bank, a bank which has adopted CBS. The fixed deposits 
mature on 28.2.2024.  
(iii) 
On 1.10.2023, Mr. Rajesh started a six months recurring deposit of ` 2,00,000 
per month@8% p.a. with PQR Bank. The recurring deposit matures on 
31.3.2024.  
SOLUTION 
(i) 
ABC Co-operative Bank has to deduct tax at source@10% on the interest of  
` 45,000 (9% × ` 10 lakh × ½) under section 194A. The tax deductible at 
source under section 194A from such interest is, therefore, ` 4,500. 
(ii) 
XYZ Bank has to deduct tax at source@10% u/s 194A, since the aggregate 
interest on fixed deposit with the three branches of the bank is ` 60,750 
[3,00,000 × 3 × 9% × 9/12], which exceeds the threshold limit of ` 40,000. 
Since XYZ Bank has adopted CBS, the aggregate interest credited/paid by all 
branches has to be considered. Since the aggregate interest of ` 60,750 
exceeds the threshold limit of ` 40,000, tax has to be deducted@10%  
u/s 194A.  
(iii) 
No tax has to be deducted under section 194A by PQR Bank on the interest 
of ` 28,000 falling due on recurring deposit on 31.3.2024 to Mr. Rajesh, 
since such interest does not exceed the threshold limit of ` 40,000. 
3.4 Payments 
to 
contractors 
and 
sub-contractors  
[Section 194C]  
(1) 
Applicability of TDS under section 194C 
 
Section 194C provides for deduction of tax at source from the payment 
made to resident contractors and sub-contractors.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
 
7.18 
 
Tax has to be deducted at source under section 194C by any person 
responsible for paying any sum to a resident contractor for carrying out any 
work (including supply of labour for carrying out any work) in pursuance of 
a contract between the contractor and the – 
(i)
the Central Government or any State Government; or 
(ii)
any local authority; or 
(iii)
any statutory corporation; or 
(iv)
any company; or 
(v)
any co-operative society; or 
(vi)
any statutory authority dealing with housing accommodation or for 
the purpose of planning, development or improvement of cities, towns 
and villages or for both; or  
(vii)
any society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860; or 
(viii) any trust; or  
(ix)
any university established or incorporated by or under a Central, State 
or Provincial Act and an institution declared to be a university under 
the UGC Act, 1956; or 
(x)
any firm; or  
(xi)
any Government of a foreign State or foreign enterprise or any 
association or body established outside India; or  
(xii)
any person, being an individual, HUF, AOP or BOI, who has total sales, 
gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on 
by him exceeding ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case 
of profession during the financial year immediately preceding the 
financial year in which such sum is credited or paid to the account of 
the contractor. 
(2) 
Time of deduction 
 
Tax has to be deducted at the time of payment of such sum or at the time 
of credit of such sum to the account of the contractor, whichever is earlier. 
 
Where any such sum is credited to any account in the books of account of 
the person liable to pay such income, such crediting is deemed to be credit 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.19 
of such income to the account of the payee and the tax has to be deducted 
at source. The account to which such sum is credited may be called 
“Suspense account” or by any other name. 
 
However, no tax has to be deducted at source in respect of payments made 
by individuals/HUF to a contractor exclusively for personal purposes. 
(3) 
Rate of TDS 
 
The rate of TDS under section 194C on payments to contractors would be 
1%, where the payee is an individual or HUF and 2% in respect of other 
payees. The same rates of TDS would apply for both contractors and sub-
contractors.  
 
The applicable rates of TDS under section 194C are as follows – 
Payee 
TDS rate 
Individual HUF contractor/sub-contractor 
1% 
Other than individual/HUF contractor/ sub-contractor 
2% 
Contractor in transport business (if PAN is furnished) 
Nil 
Sub-contractor in transport business (if PAN is furnished) 
Nil 
(4) 
Threshold limit for deduction of tax at source under section 194C 
No deduction will be required to be made if the consideration for the 
contract does not exceed ` 30,000. However, to prevent the practice of 
composite contracts being split up into contracts valued at less than 
` 30,000 to avoid tax deduction, it has been provided that tax will be 
required to be deducted at source where the amount credited or paid or 
likely to be credited or paid to a contractor or sub-contractor exceeds 
` 30,000 in a single payment or ` 1,00,000 in the aggregate during a 
financial year. 
 
Therefore, even if a single payment to a contractor does not exceed  
` 30,000, TDS provisions under section 194C would be attracted where the 
aggregate of the amounts of such sums credited or paid or likely to be 
credited or paid to the contractor during the financial year exceeds  
` 1,00,000.   
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
 
7.20 
ILLUSTRATION 3 
ABC Ltd. makes the following payments to Mr. X, a contractor, for contract 
work during the P.Y.2023-24– 
` 20,000 on 1.5.2023 
` 25,000 on 1.8.2023 
` 28,000 on 1.12.2023 
On 1.3.2024, a payment of ` 30,000 is due to Mr. X on account of a contract work. 
Discuss whether ABC Ltd. is liable to deduct tax at source under section 194C 
from payments made to Mr. X. 
SOLUTION 
In this case, the individual contract payments made to Mr. X does not 
exceed ` 30,000.  However, since the aggregate amount paid to Mr. X 
during the P.Y. 2023-24 exceeds ` 1,00,000 (on account of the last payment 
of ` 30,000, due on 1.3.2024, taking the total from ` 73,000 to ` 1,03,000), 
the TDS provisions under section 194C would get attracted. Tax has to be 
deducted@1% on the entire amount of ` 1,03,000 from the last payment of 
` 30,000 and the balance of ` 28,970 (i.e., ` 30,000 – ` 1,030) has to be paid 
to Mr. X. 
(5) 
Definition of work 
Work includes – 
(a)
advertising; 
(b)
broadcasting and telecasting including production of programmes for 
such broadcasting or telecasting; 
(c)
carriage of goods or passengers by any mode of transport other than 
by railways; 
(d)
catering; 
(e)
manufacturing or supplying a product according to the requirement 
or specification of a customer by using material purchased from such 
customer or its associate, being a person related to the customer in 
such manner as defined u/s 40A(2)(b), (i.e., the customer would be in 
the place of assessee; and the associate would be the related 
person(s) mentioned in that section). 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.21 
 
However, “work” shall not include manufacturing or supplying a product 
according to the requirement or specification of a customer by using raw 
material purchased from a person, other than such customer or associate of 
such customer, as such a contract is a contract for ‘sale’. However, this will 
not be applicable to a contract which does not entail manufacture or supply 
of an article or thing (e.g. a construction contract).   
 
It may be noted that the term “work” would include manufacturing or 
supplying a product according to the requirement or specification of a 
customer by using material purchased from such customer or its associate. 
In such a case, tax shall be deducted on the invoice value excluding the 
value of material purchased from such customer or its associate, if such 
value is mentioned separately in the invoice. Where the material component 
has not been separately mentioned in the invoice, tax shall be deducted on 
the whole of the invoice value.  
(6) 
Non-applicability of TDS under section 194C 
 
No deduction is required to be made from the sum credited or paid or likely 
to be credited or paid during the previous year to the account of a 
contractor, during the course of the business of plying, hiring or leasing 
goods carriages, if he furnishes his PAN to the deductor. 
 
In order to convey the true intent of law, it has been clarified that this 
relaxation from the requirement to deduct tax at source shall only be 
applicable to the payment in the nature of transport charges (whether paid 
by a person engaged in the business of transport or otherwise) made to a 
contractor, who fulfills the following three conditions cumulatively - 
 
 
 
Exemption 
u/s 
194C(6)
owns ten or 
less goods 
carriages at any 
time during the 
previous year
is engaged in the 
business of plying, 
hiring or leasing 
goods carriages
has  furnished a 
declaration to this 
effect along with 
his PAN
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
 
7.22 
Meaning of Goods carriage: 
Goods carriage means - 
(i)
any motor vehicle constructed or adapted for use solely for the 
carriage of goods; or 
(ii)
any motor vehicle not so constructed or adapted, when used for the 
carriage of goods. 
 
The term “motor vehicle” does not include vehicles having less than 
four wheels and with engine capacity not exceeding 25cc as well as 
vehicles running on rails or vehicles adapted for use in a factory or in 
enclosed premises. 
(7) 
Important points 
(i) 
The deduction of income-tax will be made from sums paid for carrying 
out any work or for supplying labour for carrying out any work. In 
other words, the section will apply only in relation to ‘works contracts’ 
and ‘labour contracts’ and will not cover contracts for sale of goods. 
(ii) 
Contracts for rendering professional services by lawyers, physicians, 
surgeons, engineers, accountants, architects, consultants etc., cannot 
be regarded as contracts for carrying out any “work” and, accordingly, 
no deduction of income-tax is to be made from payments relating to 
such contracts under this section. Separate provisions for fees for 
professional services have been made under section 194J. 
(iii) 
The deduction of income-tax must be made at the time of credit of the sum 
to the account of the contractor, or at the time of payment thereof in cash 
or by issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier. 
ILLUSTRATION 4 
Certain concessions are granted to transport operators in the context of cash 
payments u/s 40A(3) and deduction of tax at source u/s 194-C. Elucidate. 
SOLUTION 
Section 40A(3) provides for disallowance of expenditure incurred in respect of 
which payment or aggregate of payments made to a person in a day exceeds  
` 10,000, and such payment or payments are made otherwise than by account 
payee cheque or account payee bank draft or use of electronic clearing system 
through  bank account or through other prescribed electronic modes. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.23 
However, in case of payment made to transport operators for plying, hiring or 
leasing goods carriages, the disallowance will be attracted only if the payment 
made to a person in a day exceeds ` 35,000. Therefore, payment or aggregate of 
payments up to ` 35,000 in a day can be made to a transport operator otherwise 
than by way of account payee cheque or account payee bank draft or use of 
electronic system through bank account or through other prescribed electronic 
modes, without attracting disallowance u/s 40A(3). 
Under section 194C, tax had to be deducted in respect of payments made to 
contractors at the rate of 1%, in case the payment is made to individual or Hindu 
Undivided Family or at the rate of 2%, in any other case. 
However, no deduction is required to be made from any sum credited or paid or 
likely to be credited or paid during the previous year to the account of a 
contractor, during the course of the business of plying, hiring or leasing goods 
carriages, if the following conditions are fulfilled:- 
(1) 
He owns ten or less goods carriages at any time during the previous year. 
(2) 
He is engaged in the business of plying, hiring or leasing goods carriages;  
(3) 
He has furnished a declaration to this effect along with his PAN. 
3.5 Commission or brokerage [Section 194H] 
(1) 
Applicability and Rate of TDS 
 
Any person other than an individual or HUF, who is responsible for paying 
any income by way of commission (other than insurance commission) or 
brokerage to a resident shall deduct income tax at the rate of 5%. 
 
However, an individual or HUF whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover 
from the business or profession carried on by him exceed ` 1 crore in case 
of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession during the financial year 
immediately preceding financial year in which such commission or 
brokerage is credited or paid, is liable to deduct tax at source.  
(2) 
Time of deduction 
 
The deduction shall be made at the time such income is credited to the 
account of the payee or at the time of payment in cash or by issue of 
cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier.   
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.24 
Even where income is credited to some other account, whether called 
“Suspense account” or by any other name, in the books of account of the 
person liable to pay such income, such crediting shall be deemed to be 
credit to the account of the payee for the purposes of this section. 
(3)
Threshold limit
No deduction is required if the amount of such income or the aggregate of
such amount does not exceed ` 15,000 during the financial year.
(4)
Meaning of “Commission or brokerage”
“Commission or brokerage” includes any payment received or receivable,
directly or indirectly, by a person acting on behalf of another person
-
for services rendered, or
-
for any services in the course of buying or selling of goods, or
-
in relation to any transaction relating to any asset, valuable article or
thing, other than securities.
(5)
Non-applicability of TDS under section 194H
(i)
This section is not applicable to professional services. “Professional
Services” means services rendered by a person in the course of
carrying on legal, medical, engineering or architectural profession or
the profession of accountancy or technical consultancy or interior
decoration or such other profession as notified by the CBDT for the
purpose of compulsory maintenance of books of account under
section 44AA.
(ii)
Further, there would be no requirement to deduct tax at source on
commission or brokerage payments by BSNL or MTNL to their public
call office (PCO) franchisees.
(6)
Applicability of TDS provisions on payments by television channels and
publishing houses to advertisement companies for procuring or
canvassing for advertisements [Circular No. 05/2016, dated 29-2-2016]
There are two types of payments involved in the advertising business:
(i)
Payment by client to the advertising agency, and
(ii)
Payment by advertising agency to the television channel/newspaper
company
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.25 
The applicability of TDS on these payments has already been dealt with in 
Circular No. 715 dated 8-8-1995, where it has been clarified in Question 
Nos. 1 & 2 that while TDS under section 194C (as work contract) will be 
applicable on the first type of payment, there will be no TDS under section 
194C on the second type of payment e.g. payment by advertising agency to 
the media company. 
However, another issue has been raised in various cases as to whether the 
fees/charges taken or retained by advertising companies from media 
companies for canvasing/booking advertisements (typically 15% of the 
billing) is ‘commission’ or ‘discount’ for attracting the provisions of  
section 194H.  
The CBDT has clarified that no TDS is attracted on payments made by television 
channels/newspaper companies to the advertising agency for booking or 
procuring of or canvassing for advertisements. It is also further clarified that 
‘commission’ referred to in Question No.27 of the CBDT’s Circular No. 715 
dated 8-8-1995 does not refer to payments by media companies to advertising 
companies for booking of advertisements but to payments for engagement of 
models, artists, photographers, sportspersons, etc. and, therefore, is not 
relevant to the issue of TDS referred to in this Circular. 
ILLUSTRATION 5 
Moon TV, a television channel, made payment of ` 50 lakhs to a production house 
for production of programme for telecasting as per the specifications given by the 
channel. The copyright of the programme is also transferred to Moon TV. Would 
such payment be liable for tax deduction at source under section 194C? Discuss. 
Also, examine whether the provisions of tax deduction at source under section 194C 
would be attracted if the payment was made by Moon TV for acquisition of 
telecasting rights of the content already produced by the production house. 
SOLUTION 
In this case, since the programme is produced by the production house as per the 
specifications given by Moon TV, a television channel, and the copyright is also 
transferred to the television channel, the same falls within the scope of definition 
of the term ‘work’ under section 194C. Therefore, the payment of ` 50 lakhs made 
by Moon TV to the production house would be subject to tax deduction at source 
under section 194C. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.26 
If, however, the payment was made by Moon TV for acquisition of telecasting 
rights of the content already produced by the production house, there is no 
contract for ‘’carrying out any work”, as required in section 194C(1). Therefore, 
such payment would not be liable for tax deduction at source under 
section 194C. 
3.6 Rent [Section 194-I] 
(1)
Applicability and Rate of TDS
Any person other than individual or HUF, who is responsible for paying to a
resident any income by way of rent, is liable to deduct tax at source.
However, an individual or HUF whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover
from the business or profession carried on by him exceed ` 1 crore in case
of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession during the financial year
immediately preceding financial year in which such rent was credited or
paid, is liable to deduct tax at source.
(2)
Rate of TDS
Tax has to be deducted at the rate of:
(i) 
2% in respect of rent for plant, machinery or equipment; 
(ii) 
10% in respect of other rental payments (i.e., rent for use of any land 
or building, including factory building, or land appurtenant to a 
building, including factory building, or furniture or fittings). 
(3)
Time of deduction
This deduction is to be made at the time of credit of such income to the
account of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue
of cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier.
Where any such income is credited to any account, whether called
“Suspense account” or by any other name, in the books of account of the
person liable to pay such income, such crediting shall be deemed to be
credit of such income to the account of the payee and the provisions of this
section will apply accordingly.
(4)
Threshold limit
No deduction need be made where the amount of such income or the
aggregate of the amounts of such income credited or paid or likely to be
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.27 
credited or paid during the financial year to the account of the payee does 
not exceed ` 2,40,000. 
(5) 
Meaning of Rent 
 
“Rent” means any payment, by whatever name called, under any lease, sub-
lease, tenancy or any other agreement or arrangement for the use of (either 
separately or together) any – 
(a)
land; or  
(b)
building (including factory building); or 
(c)
land appurtenant to a building (including factory building); or 
(d)
machinery; or 
(e)
plant; or 
(f)
equipment; or 
(g)
furniture; or 
(h)
fittings, 
 
whether or not any or all of the above are owned by the payee. 
(6) 
Applicability of TDS provisions under section 194-I to payments made 
by the customers on account of cooling charges to the cold storage 
owners 
 
CBDT Circular No.1/2008 dated 10.1.2008 provides clarification regarding 
applicability of provisions of section 194-I to payments made by the 
customers on account of cooling charges to the cold storage owners. 
 
The main function of the cold storage is to preserve perishable goods by 
means of a mechanical process, and storage of such goods is only incidental 
in nature.  The customer is also not given any right to use any demarcated 
space/place or the machinery of the cold store and thus does not become a 
tenant.  Therefore, the provisions of 194-I are not applicable to the cooling 
charges paid by the customers of the cold storage.  
 
However, since the arrangement between the customers and cold storage 
owners are basically contractual in nature, the provision of section 194-C 
will be applicable to the amounts paid as cooling charges by the customers 
of the cold storage. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
 
7.28 
(7) 
No requirement to deduct tax at source under section 194-I on 
remittance of Passenger Service Fees (PSF) by an Airline to an Airport 
Operator [Circular No. 21/2017, dated 12.06.2017] 
 
The primary requirement of any payment to qualify as rent is that the 
payment must be for the use of land and building and mere 
incidental/minor/ insignificant use of the same while providing other 
facilities and service would not make it a payment for use of land and 
buildings so as to attract section 194-I. 
 
Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide this circular, clarified that the provisions of 
section 194-I shall not be applicable on payment of PSF by an airline to 
Airport Operator. 
(8) 
Applicability of TDS provisions under section 194-I to service tax 
component of rental income 
 
CBDT Circular No.4/2008 dated 28.4.2008 provides clarification on 
deduction of tax at source (TDS) on service tax component of rental income 
under section 194-I.  
 
As per the provisions of 194-I, tax is deductible at source on income by way 
of rent paid to any resident. Further, rent has been defined in 194-I to mean 
any payment, by whatever name called, under any lease, sub-lease, tenancy 
or any other agreement or arrangement for the use of (either separately or 
together) any,-  
(a) 
land; or  
(b) 
building (including factory building); or  
(c) 
land appurtenant to a building (including factory building); or  
(d) 
machinery; or  
(e) 
plant; or  
(f) 
equipment; or  
(g) 
furniture; or  
(h) 
fittings,  
 
whether or not any or all of the above are owned by the payee.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.29 
 
Service tax paid by the tenant doesn’t partake the nature of income of the 
landlord. The landlord only acts as a collecting agency for Government for 
collection of service tax. Therefore, tax deduction at source under section  
194-I would be required to be made on the amount of rent paid/payable 
without including the service tax.  
 
Note - It is possible to take a view that the clarification given in Circular 
No.4/2008 would apply in the GST regime also.     
Clarification regarding TDS on Goods and Services Tax (GST) 
component comprised in payments made to residents 
[Circular No. 23/2017 dated 19.07.2017] 
The CBDT has, vide this circular, clarified that wherever in terms of the 
agreement or contract between the payer and the payee, the component of 
‘GST on services’ comprised in the amount payable to a resident is indicated 
separately, tax shall be deducted at source on the amount paid or payable 
without including such ‘GST on services’ component.  
GST shall include Integrated Goods and Services Tax, Central Goods and 
Services Tax, State Goods and Services Tax and Union Territory Goods and 
Services Tax. 
Further, for the purposes of this Circular, any reference to “service tax” in an 
existing agreement or contract which was entered into prior to 01.07.2017 
shall be treated as “GST on services” with respect to the period from 
01.07.2017 onward till the expiry of such agreement or contract. 
(9) 
Clarification on applicability of TDS provisions of section 194-I on 
lumpsum lease premium paid for acquisition of long term lease 
[Circular No.35/2016, dated 13-10-2016] 
 
The issue of whether or not TDS under section 194-I is applicable on ‘lump 
sum lease premium’ or ‘one-time upfront lease charges” paid by an 
assessee for acquiring long-term leasehold rights for land or any other 
property has been examined by the CBDT. 
 
Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide this Circular, clarified that lump sum lease 
premium or one-time upfront lease charges, which are not adjustable 
against periodic rent, paid or payable for acquisition of long-term leasehold 
rights over land or any other property are not payments in the nature of 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
 
7.30 
rent within the meaning of section 194-I. Therefore, such payments are not 
liable for TDS under section 194-I.  
ILLUSTRATION 6 
XYZ Ltd. pays ` 50,000 per month as rent to the Mr. Kishore for a building in which 
one of its branches is situated. Discuss whether TDS provisions under section 194-I 
are attracted. 
SOLUTION 
Section 194-I, which governs the deduction of tax at source on payment of rent, 
exceeding ` 2,40,000 p.a., is applicable to all taxable entities except individuals 
and HUFs, whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover from the business or 
profession carried on by him does not exceed ` 1 crore in case of business and  
` 50 lakhs in case of profession during the financial year immediately preceding 
financial year in which such rent was credited or paid, is liable to deduct tax at 
source. 
Since the rent paid by XYZ Ltd. to Mr. Kishore exceeds ` 2,40,000, the provisions 
of section 194-I for deduction of tax at source attracted.  
The rate applicable for deduction at source under section 194-I on rent paid is 
10%, assuming that Mr. Kishore had furnished his PAN to XYZ Ltd.  
Therefore, the amount of tax to be deducted at source 
= ` 6,00,000 x 10% = ` 60,000 
3.7 Payment of rent by certain individuals or Hindu 
undivided family [Section 194-IB] 
(1) 
Applicability and Rate of TDS 
Section 194-IB requires any person, being individual or HUF, other than 
those individual or HUF whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover from 
the business or profession exceeds ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 
lakhs in case of profession in the financial year immediately preceding the 
financial year in which such rent was credited or paid, responsible for paying 
to a resident any income by way of rent, to deduct income tax @5%. 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.31 
(2) 
Threshold limit 
 
Under this section, tax has to be deducted at source only if the amount of 
such rent exceeds ` 50,000 for a month or part of a month during the 
previous year. 
(3) 
Time of deduction 
 
This deduction is to be made at the time of credit of such rent, for the last 
month of the previous year or the last month of tenancy, if the property is 
vacated during the year, as the case may be, to the account of the payee or 
at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue of cheque or draft or by 
any other mode, whichever is earlier. 
(4) 
No requirement to obtain TAN 
 
The provisions of section 203A containing the requirement of obtaining Tax 
deduction account number (TAN) shall not apply to the person required to 
deduct tax in accordance with the provisions of section 194-IB. 
(5) 
Meaning of “Rent” 
 
“Rent” means any payment, by whatever name called, under any lease, sub-
lease, tenancy or any other agreement or arrangement for the use of any 
land or building or both. 
(6) 
Deduction not to exceed rent for last month 
 
Where the tax is required to be deducted as per the provisions of section 
206AA, such deduction shall not exceed the amount of rent payable for the 
last month of the previous year or the last month of the tenancy, as the case 
may be [Section 206AA providing for deduction of tax at source at a higher 
rate is discussed at length later on in this chapter] 
ILLUSTRATION 7 
Mr. X, a salaried individual, pays rent of ` 55,000 per month to Mr. Y from June, 
2023. Is he required to deduct tax at source? If so, when is he required to deduct 
tax? Also, compute the amount of tax to be deducted at source. 
Would your answer change if Mr. X vacated the premises on 31st December, 2023? 
Also, what would be your answer if Mr. Y does not provide his PAN to Mr. X? 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
 
7.32 
SOLUTION 
Since Mr. X pays rent exceeding ` 50,000 per month in the F.Y. 2023-24, he is 
liable to deduct tax at source @5% of such rent for F.Y. 2023-24 under section 
194-IB. Thus, ` 27,500 [` 55,000 x 5% x 10] has to be deducted from rent payable 
for March, 2024. 
If Mr. X vacated the premises in December, 2023, then tax of ` 19,250 [` 55,000 x 
5% x 7] has to be deducted from rent payable for December, 2023. 
In case Mr. Y does not provide his PAN to Mr. X, tax would be deductible@20%, 
instead of 5%.  
In case 1 above, this would amount to ` 1,10,000 [` 55,000 x 20% x 10], but the 
same has to be restricted to ` 55,000, being rent for March, 2024. 
In case 2 above, this would amount to ` 77,000 [` 55,000 x 20% x 7], but the same 
has to be restricted to ` 55,000, being rent for December, 2023. 
3.8 Fees for professional or technical services [Section 194J] 
(1) 
Applicability and Rate of TDS 
 
Every person other than an individual or a HUF, who is responsible for 
paying to a resident any sum by way of – 
(i) 
fees for professional services; or  
(ii) 
fees for technical services; or  
(iii) 
any remuneration or fees or commission, by whatever name called, 
other than those on which tax is deductible under section 192, to a 
director of a company; or 
(iv) 
royalty, or  
(v) 
non-compete fees referred to in section 28(va) 
shall deduct tax at source at the rate of – 
(a)
2% in case of fees for technical services (not being professional 
services) or royalty in the nature of consideration for sale, distribution 
or exhibition of cinematographic films; and 
(b)
10% in other cases. 
However, in case of a payee, engaged only in the business of operation of 
call centre, the tax shall be deducted at source @2% 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
7.33 
(2)
Time of deduction
The deduction is to be made at the time of credit of such sum to the
account of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue
of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier.
Where such sum is credited to any account, whether called suspense
account or by any other name, in the books of accounts of the person liable
to pay such sum, such crediting shall be deemed to be credit of such sum to
the account of the payee and tax has to be deducted accordingly.
(3)
Threshold limit
No tax deduction is required if the amount of fees or the aggregate of the
amounts of fees credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid during a
financial year does not exceed ` 30,000 in the case of fees for professional 
services, ` 30,000 in the case of fees for technical services, ` 30,000 in the 
case of royalty and ` 30,000 in the case of non-compete fees. 
The limit of ` 30,000 under section 194J is applicable separately for fees for 
professional services, fees for technical services, royalty and non-compete 
fees referred to in section 28(va). It implies that if the payment to a person 
towards each of the above is less than ` 30,000, no tax is required to be 
deducted at source, even though the aggregate payment or credit exceeds 
` 30,000. However, there is no such exemption limit for deduction of tax on 
any remuneration or fees or commission payable to director of a company. 
Summary of rates and threshold limit under section 194J for deduction 
of tax at source 
Nature of payment 
TDS rate 
Separate 
Limit 
Fees for technical services (not being 
professional services) 
2% 
` 30,000 
Fees for professional services 
10% 
` 30,000 
Royalty in the nature of consideration for 
sale, 
distribution 
or 
exhibition 
of 
cinematographic films 
2% 
` 30,000 
Other royalty 
10% 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
 
7.34 
Any remuneration or fees or commission, 
by whatever name called, other than those 
on which tax is deductible under section 
192, to a director of a company 
10% 
 
Nil 
Non-compete fees 
10% 
` 30,000 
In case of a payee, engaged only in the business of operation of call centre, 
the tax shall be deducted at source @2% 
ILLUSTRATION 8 
XYZ Ltd. makes a payment of ` 28,000 to Mr. Ganesh on 2.8.2023 towards 
fees for professional services and another payment of ` 25,000 to him on the 
same date towards fees for technical services. Discuss whether TDS provisions 
under section 194J are attracted. 
SOLUTION 
TDS provisions under section 194J would not get attracted, since the limit of 
` 30,000 is applicable for fees for professional services and fees for technical 
services, separately. It is assumed that there is no other payment to  
Mr. Ganesh towards fees for professional services and fees for technical 
services during the P.Y.2023-24. 
(4) 
Non-applicability of TDS under section 194J 
(i) 
An individual or a Hindu undivided family is not liable to deduct tax at 
source. 
However, an individual or HUF, whose total sales, gross receipts or 
turnover from business or profession carried by him exceeds ` 1 crore 
in case of business or ` 50 lakhs in case of profession in the financial 
year immediately preceding the financial year in which the fees for 
professional services or fees for technical services is credited or 
paid is required to deduct tax on such fees. 
Since this provision requires such individuals/HUFs to 
deduct tax at source only in respect of fees for professional 
services or fees for technical services, it can be inferred 
that individuals and HUFs are not required to deduct tax at source 
under section 194J on royalty and non-compete fees. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
7.35 
(ii)
Further, an individual or Hindu Undivided Family, shall not be liable to
deduct income-tax on the sum payable by way of fees for professional
services, in case such sum is credited or paid exclusively for personal
purposes.
(5)
Meaning of “Professional services”
“Professional services” means services rendered by a person in the course of
carrying on legal, medical, engineering or architectural profession or the
profession of accountancy or technical consultancy or interior decoration or
advertising or such other profession as is notified by the CBDT for the
purposes of section 44AA or of this section.
Other professions notified for the purposes of section 44AA are as follows:
(a)
Profession of “authorised representatives”;
(b)
Profession of “film artist”;
(c)
Profession of “company secretary”;
(d)
Profession of “information technology”.
The CBDT has notified the services rendered by following persons in relation 
to the sports activities as Professional Services for the purpose of the 
section 194J:  
(a)
Sports Persons,
(b)
Umpires and Referees,
(c)
Coaches and Trainers,
(d)
Team Physicians and Physiotherapists,
(e)
Event Managers,
(f)
Commentators,
(g)
Anchors and
(h)
Sports Columnists.
Accordingly, the requirement of TDS as per section 194J would apply to all 
the aforesaid professions. The term “profession”, as such, is of a very wide 
import. However, the term has been defined in this section exhaustively. For 
the purposes of TDS, therefore, all other professions would be outside the 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.36 
scope of section 194J. For example, this section will not apply to professions 
of teaching, sculpture, painting etc. unless they are notified. 
(6)
Meaning of “Fees for technical services”
The term ‘fees for technical services’ means any consideration (including any
lump sum consideration) for rendering of any of the following services:
(i)
Managerial services;
(ii)
Technical services;
(iii)
Consultancy services;
(iv)
Provision of services of technical or other personnel.
It is expressly provided that the term ‘fees for technical services’ will not 
include following types of consideration: 
(i)
Consideration for any construction, assembly, mining or like project,
or
(ii)
Consideration which is chargeable under the head ‘Salaries’.
(7)    TPAs liable to deduct tax under section 194J on payment to hospitals
on behalf of insurance companies
The CBDT has, through Circular No.8/2009 dated 24.11.2009, clarified that
TPAs (Third Party Administrator’s) who are making payment on behalf of
insurance companies to hospitals for settlement of medical/insurance claims
etc. under various schemes including cashless schemes are liable to deduct
tax at source under section 194J on all such payments to hospitals etc.   This
is because the services rendered by hospitals to various patients are
primarily medical services and, therefore, the provisions of section 194J are
applicable to payments made by TPAs to hospitals etc.
(8)
Consideration for use or right to use of computer software is royalty
within the meaning of section 9(1)(vi)
As per section 9(1)(vi), any income payable by way of royalty in respect of
any right, property or information is deemed to accrue or arise in India.  The
term “royalty” means consideration for transfer of all or any right in respect
of certain rights, property or information.
As per Explanation 4 to section 9(1)(vi), the consideration for use or right to
use of computer software would be royalty. This Explanation clarifies that
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
7.37 
transfer of all or any rights in respect of any right, property or information 
includes and has always included transfer of all or any right for use or right 
to use a computer software (including granting of a licence) irrespective of 
the medium through which such right is transferred. 
Consequently, the provisions of tax deduction at source under section 194J 
would be attracted in respect of consideration for use or right to use 
computer software since the same falls within the definition of royalty as 
per the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.  
The Central Government has, vide Notification No.21/2012 dated 
13.6.2012, effective from 1st July, 2012, exempted certain software 
payments from the applicability of tax deduction under section 
194J. Accordingly, where payment is made by the transferee for acquisition of 
software from a resident-transferor, the provisions of section 194J would not 
be attracted if- 
(1)
the software is acquired in a subsequent transfer without any
modification by the transferor;
(2)
tax has been deducted under section 194J on payment for any
previous transfer of such software; and
(3)
the transferee obtains a declaration from the transferor that tax has
been so deducted along with the PAN of the transferor.
3.9 Payment made by an individual or a HUF for contract 
work or by way of commission or brokerage or fees for 
professional services [Section 194M] 
(1)
Applicability and rate of TDS
Section 194M provides for deduction of tax at source @5% by an individual
or a HUF responsible for paying any sum during the financial year to any
resident –
(i)
for carrying out any work (including supply of labour for carrying out
any work) in pursuance of a contract; or
(ii)
by way of commission (not being insurance commission referred to in
section 194D) or brokerage; or
(iii)
by way of fees for professional services.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.38 
It may be noted that only individuals and HUFs (other than those who are 
required to deduct income-tax as per the provisions of section 194C or 
194H or 194J) are required to deduct tax in respect of the above sums 
payable during the financial year to a resident. 
(2)
Time of deduction
The tax should be deducted at the time of credit of such sum or at the time
of payment of such sum, whichever is earlier.
(3)
Threshold limit
No tax is required to be deducted where such sum or, as the case may be,
aggregate amount of such sums credited or paid to a resident during the
financial year does not exceed ` 50,00,000
(4)
Non-applicability of TDS under section 194M
An individual or a Hindu undivided family is not liable to deduct tax at
source u/s 194M if –
(i)
they are required to deduct tax at source u/s 194C for carrying out any
work (including supply of labour for carrying out any work) in
pursuance of a contract i.e., an individual or a HUF whose total sales,
gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on
by him exceeds ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of
profession during the immediately preceding financial year and such
amount is not exclusively credited or paid for personal purposes of
such individual or HUF.
(ii)
they are required to deduct tax at source u/s 194H on commission
(not being insurance commission referred to in section 194D) or
brokerage i.e., an individual or a HUF whose total sales, gross receipts
or turnover from the business or profession carried on by him exceeds
` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession
during the immediately preceding financial year.
(iii)
they are required to deduct tax at source u/s 194J on fees for
professional services i.e., an individual or a HUF whose total sales,
gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on
by him exceeds ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.39 
profession during the immediately preceding financial year and such 
amount is not exclusively credited or paid for personal purposes of 
such individual or HUF. 
(5) 
No requirement to obtain TAN 
 
The provisions of section 203A containing the requirement of obtaining Tax 
deduction account number (TAN) shall not apply to the person required to 
deduct tax in accordance with the provisions of section 194M. 
Note - For the meaning of the terms “Work”, “Professional services” and 
“Commission or brokerage” refer sub-heading “3.4 Payments to contractors and 
sub-contractors [Section 194C]”, “3.8 Fees for professional or technical services 
[Section 194J]” and “3.5 Commission or brokerage [Section 194H]”, respectively. 
ILLUSTRATION 9 
Examine whether TDS provisions would be attracted in the following cases, and if 
so, under which section. Also specify the rate of TDS applicable in each case. 
Assume that all payments are made to residents. 
 
Particulars of the 
payer 
Nature of payment 
Aggregate of 
payments made in 
the F.Y.2023-24 
1. 
Mr. 
Ganesh, 
an 
individual 
carrying 
on 
retail 
business 
with turnover of ` 2.5 
crores 
in 
the 
P.Y.2022-23 
Contract 
Payment 
for 
repair of residential house 
` 5 lakhs 
Payment of commission to 
Mr. Vallish for business 
purposes 
`  80,000 
2. 
Mr. 
Rajesh, 
a 
wholesale 
trader 
whose turnover was  
` 95 lakhs in P.Y. 
2022-23. 
Contract 
Payment 
for 
reconstruction 
of 
residential house (made 
during the period January-
March, 2024) 
` 
20 
lakhs 
in 
January, 
2024,  
` 15 lakhs in Feb 
2024 and ` 20 lakhs 
in March 2024. 
3. 
Mr. Satish, a salaried 
individual 
Payment of brokerage for 
buying a residential house 
in March, 2024 
` 51 lakhs  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
 
7.40 
4. 
Mr. 
Dheeraj, 
a 
pensioner 
Contract payment made 
during October-November 
2023 for reconstruction of 
residential house  
` 48 lakhs 
SOLUTION 
 
Particulars 
of the payer 
Nature of 
payment 
Aggregate 
of payments 
in the 
F.Y.2023-24 
Whether TDS 
provisions are 
attracted? 
1. 
Mr. 
Ganesh, 
an individual 
carrying 
on 
retail 
business with 
turnover 
of 
` 2.5 crores 
in 
the 
P.Y.2022-23 
Contract 
Payment 
for 
repair 
of 
residential 
house 
` 5 lakhs 
No; TDS under section 
194C is not attracted 
since the payment is for 
personal purpose. TDS 
under section 194M is 
not 
attracted 
as   
aggregate 
of 
contract 
payment to the payee in 
the P.Y.2023-24 does not 
exceed ` 50 lakh. 
Payment 
of 
commission to 
Mr. Vallish for 
business 
purposes 
` 80,000 
Yes, u/s 194H, since the 
payment exceeds ` 15,000, 
and Mr. Ganesh’s turnover 
exceeds ` 1 crore in the 
P.Y.2022-23. 
2. 
Mr. Rajesh, a 
wholesale 
trader whose 
turnover was 
` 95 lakhs in 
P.Y. 2022-23 
Contract 
Payment 
for 
reconstruction 
of 
residential 
house 
` 55 lakhs 
Yes, u/s 194M, since the 
aggregate of payments 
(i.e., ` 55 lakhs) exceed 
` 50 lakhs. Since, his 
turnover 
does 
not 
exceed 1 crore in the 
P.Y.2022-23, 
TDS 
provisions under section 
194C are not attracted in 
respect 
of 
payments 
made 
in 
the 
P.Y. 2023-24. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
7.41 
3. 
Mr. Satish, a 
salaried 
individual 
Payment 
of 
brokerage for 
buying 
a 
residential 
house 
` 51 lakhs 
Yes, u/s 194M, since the 
payment of ` 51 lakhs 
made 
in 
March 
2024 
exceeds the threshold of 
` 
50 
lakhs. 
Since 
Mr. Satish is a salaried 
individual, the provisions 
of section 194H are not 
applicable in this case. 
4. 
Mr. Dheeraj, a 
pensioner 
Contract 
payment 
for 
reconstruction 
of 
residential 
house 
` 48 lakhs 
TDS 
provisions 
under 
section 
194C 
are 
not 
attracted 
since 
Mr. 
Dheeraj 
is 
a 
pensioner. TDS provisions 
under section 194M are 
also not applicable in this 
case, since the payment 
of ` 48 lakhs does not 
exceed the threshold of 
` 50 lakhs. 
3.10 TDS on cash withdrawal [Section 194N] 
(1)
Applicability and rate of TDS
Section 194N provides that every person, being
-
a banking company to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies
(including any bank or banking institution referred under section 51 of
that Act)
-
a co-operative society engaged in carrying on the business of banking or
-
a post office
who is responsible for paying any sum, being the amount or aggregate of 
amounts, as the case may be, in cash exceeding ` 1 crore during the 
previous year, to any person from one or more accounts maintained by 
such recipient-person with it, shall deduct tax at source @2% of such sum 
However, if the recipient is a co-operative society, tax is required to be 
deducted on any sum exceeding ` 3 crore. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
 
7.42 
(2) 
Time of deduction 
 
This deduction is to be made at the time of payment of such sum. 
(3) 
Modification in rate of TDS and threshold limit of withdrawal for 
recipient who has not furnished return of income for last 3 years 
 
If the recipient has not furnished the returns of income for all the three 
assessment years relevant to the three previous years, for which the time 
limit to file return of income under section 139(1) has expired, immediately 
preceding the previous year in which the payment of the sum is made, “the 
sum” shall mean the amount or the aggregate of amounts, as the case 
may be, in cash > ` 20 lakhs during the previous year, and the tax shall 
be deducted at the rate of - 
-  
2% of the sum, where the amount or aggregate of amounts, as the 
case may be, being paid in cash > ` 20 lakhs but ≤ ` 1 crore (` 3 
crore in case the recipient is a co-operative society)    
-  
5% of the sum, where the amount or aggregate of amounts, as the 
case may be, being paid in cash > ` 1 crore (` 3 crore in case the 
recipient is a co-operative society). 
 
However, the Central Government is empowered to specify, with the 
consultation of RBI, by notification, the recipient in whose case this 
provision shall not apply or apply at reduced rate, subject to the satisfaction 
of the conditions specified in such notification. 
(4) 
Non-applicability of TDS under section 194N  
 
Liability to deduct tax at source under section 194N shall not be applicable 
to any payment made to – 
(i)   
the Government 
(ii) 
any banking company or co-operative society engaged in carrying on 
the business of banking or a post-office 
(iii) 
any business correspondent of a banking company or co-operative 
society engaged in carrying on the business of banking, in accordance 
with the RBI guidelines 
(iv) 
any white label ATM operator of a banking company or co-operative 
society engaged in carrying on the business of banking, in accordance 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
7.43 
with the authorisation issued by the RBI under the Payment and 
Settlement Systems Act, 2007 
The Central Government may specify, with the consultation of RBI, by 
notification, the recipient in whose case section 194N shall not apply or 
apply at reduced rate, subject to the satisfaction of the conditions specified 
in such notification.  
Example 
The persons referred to in (i) to (vi) in Column (2) of the table below have always 
been filing their returns of income on or before the due date u/s 139(1). The persons 
mentioned in (vii) to (x) in Column (2) of the table below have not filed their returns 
of income for the last five years. Determine the liability of deduction of tax at 
source u/s 194N by the bank/co-operative bank referred to in column (3) of the 
table below in each of the following individual cases, assuming that this is the only 
withdrawal in the P.Y.2023-24 by the persons referred to in Column (2). 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
Person 
making the 
withdrawal 
Bank/Co-
operative 
Bank from 
which 
money is 
withdrawn 
Date of 
withdrawal 
Amount of 
withdrawal 
(`) 
TDS u/s 194N 
(`) 
(i) 
Mr. Harishit 
SBI 
1.7.2023 
1,10,00,000 
` 10,00,000 x 
2% = ` 20,000 
(ii) 
Mr. Pranav 
SBI 
1.8.2023 
90,00,000 
Nil (since 
withdrawals < 
` 1 crore) 
(iii) 
ABC Co-
operative 
Society 
SBI 
1.9.2023 
2,70,00,000 
Nil (since 
withdrawals < 
` 3 crore) 
(iv) 
XYZ Co-
operative 
Society 
MNO Co-
operative 
bank 
1.9.2023 
3,10,00,000 
` 10,00,000 x 
2% = ` 20,000 
(v) 
Mr. Vaibhav 
MNO Co-
operative 
bank 
1.9.2023 
2,10,00,000 
` 1,10,00,000 x 
2% = ` 2,20,000 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.44 
(vi) 
A Ltd. 
MNO Co-
operative 
bank 
1.10.2023 
1,05,00,000 
` 5,00,000 x 2% 
= ` 10,000 
(vii) 
M/s. DEF & 
Co., a firm 
MNO Co-
operative 
bank 
1.2.2024 
90,00,000 
` 70,00,000 x 
2% = ` 1,40,000 
(viii) 
Mr. Varun 
BOI 
1.2.2024 
1,20,00,000 
` 80,00,000 x 
2% (+) 
` 20,00,000 x 
5% = ` 2,60,000 
(ix) 
Mr. Rakesh 
BOI 
1.2.2024 
45,00,000 
` 25,00,000 x 
2% = ` 50,000 
(x) 
PQR Co-
operative 
Society 
BOI 
1.2.2024 
3,30,00,000 
` 2,80,00,000 x 
2% (+) 
` 30,00,000 x 
5% = ` 7,10,000 
3.11 OTHER TDS PROVISIONS 
The other TDS provisions are given below in tabular form -
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold 
Limit for 
deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of 
TDS 
Time of 
deduction 
Other relevant points 
192A Premature 
withdrawal 
from 
Employees’ 
Provident 
Fund 
Payment 
or 
aggregate 
payment 
≥ 
` 50,000 
Trustees of the 
EPF Scheme or 
any authorised 
person 
under 
the Scheme 
Individual 
(Employee) 
10% on 
premature 
taxable 
withdrawal. 
At the time 
of payment 
Exemption from TDS 
1.
Withdrawal 
after 
continuous service of 5 
years
2.
In 
case 
of
withdrawal 
before
continuous service of 5
years and –
(a) employee 
opts 
for
transfer 
of
accumulated balance
to the new employer
(b) termination is due to
ill health, contraction
or discontinuance of
business, cessation of
employment etc.
194 
Dividend 
(including 
dividends on 
preference 
shares) 
Amount 
or 
aggregate 
amount 
> 
` 5,000 in a 
F.Y., in case
The 
Principal 
Officer 
of 
a 
domestic 
company 
Resident 
shareholder 
10% 
Before 
making any 
payment 
by 
any 
mode 
in 
Exemption from TDS 
Dividend credited or paid to - 
(a) LIC, GIC, subsidiaries
of GIC or any other
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
a
a
7. 45 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold 
Limit for 
deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of 
TDS 
Time of 
deduction 
Other relevant points 
of 
dividend 
paid 
or 
credited 
to 
an individual 
shareholder 
by any mode 
other 
than 
cash 
>
No
threshold 
in 
other cases 
respect 
of 
any 
dividend or 
before 
making any 
distribution 
or payment 
of 
dividend. 
insurer provided the 
shares are owned by 
them, or they have 
full beneficial interest 
in such shares 
(b) any other person as
may be notified by
the 
Central
Government.
194B Winnings from 
any 
lottery, 
crossword 
puzzle or card 
game or other 
game of any 
sort or from 
gambling 
or 
betting 
of 
any form or 
nature (other 
than 
Amount 
or 
the 
aggregate of 
amounts 
> 
` 10,000 in a 
F.Y. 
The 
person 
responsible for 
paying income 
by way of such 
winnings 
Any Person 
30% 
At the time 
of 
payment. 
(a) Where the winnings 
are wholly in kind or 
partly 
in 
cash 
and 
partly in kind but the 
part in cash is not 
sufficient to meet the 
liability of deduction of 
tax in respect of whole 
of the winnings, the 
person responsible for 
paying 
shall, 
before 
releasing the winnings, 
INCOME TAX LAW 
7.46
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold 
Limit for 
deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of 
TDS 
Time of 
deduction 
Other relevant points 
winnings 
from 
any 
online game 
in respect of 
which 
TDS 
u/s 
194BA 
would 
be 
applicable) 
ensure that tax has 
been paid in respect of 
the winnings. 
(b) Where winnings are to 
be credited and losses 
are to be debited to 
the individual a/c of the 
punter, tax has to be 
deducted on winnings 
before set-off of losses. 
Thereafter, 
the 
net 
amount, 
after 
deduction of tax and 
losses, has to be paid 
to the winner.
194BA Winnings 
from 
online 
games 
On 
the 
net 
winnings in a 
person’s user 
account 
as 
computed 
in 
prescribed 
manner. 
Any 
person 
responsible 
for 
paying 
income 
by way of such 
winnings 
Any person 
30% 
At the end 
of the F.Y. 
In 
case, 
there 
is 
withdrawal 
from 
user 
Where the net winnings 
are wholly in kind or 
partly in cash and partly 
in kind but the part in 
cash is not sufficient to 
meet 
the 
liability 
of 
deduction of tax in respect 
of 
whole 
of 
the 
net 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
a
a
7. 47 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold 
Limit for 
deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of 
TDS 
Time of 
deduction 
Other relevant points 
account 
during the 
F.Y., 
tax 
would 
be 
deducted at 
the time of 
such
withdrawal
on 
net
winnings
comprised
in 
such
withdrawal.
In addition,
tax 
would
also 
be
deducted
on 
the
remaining
amount of 
net 
winnings in 
the 
user 
winnings, 
the 
person 
responsible 
for 
paying 
shall, before releasing the 
winnings, ensure that tax 
has been paid in respect 
of the net winnings. 
Meaning 
of 
certain 
terms: 
Online 
gaming 
intermediary 
–
An
intermediary that offers 
one 
or 
more 
online 
games. 
User – Any person who 
accesses or avails any 
computer resource of an 
online 
gaming 
intermediary. 
User account – Account 
of a user registered with 
an 
online 
gaming 
intermediary. 
INCOME TAX LAW 
7.48
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold 
Limit for 
deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of 
TDS 
Time of 
deduction 
Other relevant points 
account as 
computed 
in 
prescribed 
manner  at 
the end of 
the F.Y. 
194BB Winnings 
from 
horse 
race 
Amount 
or 
aggregate of 
amounts 
> 
` 10,000 in a 
F.Y. 
Book Maker or 
a 
person 
holding licence 
for 
horse 
racing or for 
arranging 
for 
wagering 
or 
betting in any 
race course. 
Any Person 
30% 
At the time 
of payment 
‘Any horse race’ includes, 
wherever 
the 
circumstances 
so 
necessitate, 
more 
than 
one horse race. 
194D Insurance 
Commission 
Amount 
or 
aggregate 
amount 
> 
` 15,000 in a 
F.Y. 
Any 
person 
responsible for 
paying 
any 
income by way 
of 
remuneration 
Any 
Resident 
5%, if the 
payee is 
non-
corporate 
resident 
10%, if the 
At the time 
of credit of 
such 
income 
to 
the 
account of 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
a
a
7. 49 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold 
Limit for 
deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of 
TDS 
Time of 
deduction 
Other relevant points 
or reward for 
soliciting 
or 
procuring 
insurance 
business 
(including 
the 
business 
relating to the 
continuance, 
renewal 
or 
revival 
of 
policies 
of 
insurance) 
payee 
is 
domestic 
company 
the 
payee 
or at the 
time 
of 
payment, 
whichever 
is earlier. 
194DA Any 
sum 
under a Life 
Insurance 
Policy 
not 
fulfilling 
the 
conditions 
specified u/s 
10(10D) 
 Amount 
or 
aggregate 
amount 
≥ 
` 1,00,000 in 
a 
financial 
year 
Any 
person 
responsible for 
paying any sum 
under 
a 
LIP, 
including 
the 
sum 
allocated 
by 
way 
of 
bonus 
Any 
resident 
5% of the 
amount of 
income 
comprised 
therein 
At the time 
of payment 
Exemption from TDS 
The sum received under a 
life 
insurance 
policy 
which 
fulfills 
the 
conditions 
specified 
under section 10(10D). 
INCOME TAX LAW 
7.50  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold 
Limit for 
deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of 
TDS 
Time of 
deduction 
Other relevant points 
194G Commission 
on 
sale 
of 
lottery 
tickets 
>
` 15,000 
in a F.Y.
Any 
person 
responsible for 
paying 
any 
income by way 
of commission, 
remuneration 
or 
prize 
(by 
whatever name 
called) 
on 
lottery tickets 
Any 
person 
stocking, 
distributin
g, 
purchasin
g 
or 
selling 
lottery 
tickets 
5% 
At 
the 
time 
of 
credit 
of 
such 
income to 
the 
account of 
the payee 
or at the 
time 
of 
payment, 
whichever 
is earlier. 
Where 
income 
is 
credited to some other 
account, whether called 
“Suspense account” or 
by any other name, in 
the books of account of 
the person liable to pay 
such 
income, 
such 
crediting 
shall 
be 
deemed to be credit to 
the 
account 
of 
the 
payee for the purposes 
of this section. 
194-IA Payment 
on 
transfer 
of 
certain 
immovable 
property other 
than 
agricultural 
land 
≥ ` 50 lakh 
(Consideration 
for transfer or 
stamp 
duty 
value) 
Any 
person, 
being 
a 
transferee 
(other 
than 
a 
person referred 
to 
in 
section 
194LA 
responsible for 
paying 
compensation 
Resident 
transferor 
1% of 
consideration 
for transfer 
or stamp 
duty value, 
whichever 
is higher. 
No 
requirement 
of 
At the time 
of credit of 
such 
sum 
to 
the 
account of 
the 
transferor 
or 
at 
the 
time 
of 
payment, 
Meaning 
of 
consideration 
for 
transfer of immovable 
property 
Consideration for transfer 
of 
immovable 
property 
include all charges of the 
nature 
of 
club 
membership 
fee, 
car 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
a
a
7. 51
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold 
Limit for 
deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of 
TDS 
Time of 
deduction 
Other relevant points 
for compulsory 
acquisition 
of 
immovable 
property 
other 
than 
rural 
agricultural 
land) 
obtaining 
TAN u/s 
203A. 
whichever 
is earlier. 
parking fee, electricity or 
water 
facility 
fee, 
maintenance fee, advance 
fee or any other charges 
of similar nature, which 
are incidental to transfer 
of 
the 
immovable 
property. 
194K Income 
on 
units 
other 
than 
in 
the 
nature 
of 
capital gains 
Amount 
or 
aggregate 
amount 
> 
` 5,000 in a 
F.Y. 
Any 
person 
responsible for 
paying 
any 
income 
in 
respect of units 
of 
a 
mutual 
fund/ 
Administrator 
of the specified 
undertaking/ 
specified 
company 
Any 
resident 
10% 
At the time 
of credit of 
such 
sum 
to 
the 
account of 
the 
payee 
or at the 
time 
of 
payment, 
whichever 
is earlier. 
194LA Compensation 
on acquisition 
Amount 
or 
aggregate 
Any 
person 
responsible for 
Any 
Resident 
10% 
At the time 
of payment 
TDS provisions are not 
applicable 
on 
INCOME TAX LAW 
7.52 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold 
Limit for 
deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of 
TDS 
Time of 
deduction 
Other relevant points 
of 
certain 
immovable 
property 
(other 
than 
agricultural 
land situated 
in India) 
amount 
> 
` 2,50,000 in 
a F.Y. 
paying any sum 
in the nature of 
compensation 
or 
enhanced 
compensation 
on compulsory 
acquisition 
of 
immovable 
property (other 
than 
agricultural 
land situated in 
India) 
compensation 
on 
acquisition of agricultural 
land in India, whether 
rural or urban. 
194P Pension 
(along 
with 
interest 
on 
bank account) 
Basic 
exemption 
limit 
[` 
3,00,000 
(in case the 
specified 
senior citizen 
pays 
tax 
under 
the 
default 
tax 
Notified 
specified 
bank 
(a 
banking 
company which 
is a scheduled 
bank and has 
been appointed 
as agents of RBI 
u/s 45 of the 
RBI Act, 1934 
Specified 
senior 
citizen 
Rates in 
force, 
where the 
individual 
has 
exercised 
the option 
of shifting 
out of the 
default tax 
Specified senior citizen 
means 
an 
individual, 
being a resident in India, 
who – 
-
is of the age of 75
years or more at any
time during the P.Y.;
-
is 
having 
pension
income and no other
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
a
a
7. 53 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold 
Limit for 
deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of 
TDS 
Time of 
deduction 
Other relevant points 
regime 
u/s 
115BAC), 
` 3,00,000 / 
` 5,00,000, as 
the case may 
be, 
if 
the 
specified 
senior citizen 
has exercised 
the option of 
shifting 
out 
of the default 
tax 
regime 
providing u/s 
115BAC] [i.e., 
total income 
after 
giving 
effect to the 
deduction 
allowable 
under 
Chapter VI-A, 
if 
any 
regime. 
Rates 
specified in 
section 
115BAC, 
where the 
individual 
pays tax 
under the 
default tax 
regime. 
income 
except 
interest 
income 
received or receivable 
from 
any 
account 
maintained by such 
individual in the same 
specified 
bank 
in 
which he is receiving 
his pension income; 
and 
-
has
furnished 
a 
declaration 
to 
the 
specified bank. 
Specified 
bank 
to 
compute the total income 
for the relevant A.Y. of 
the 
specified 
senior 
citizen 
who 
furnishes 
declaration in prescribed 
form, 
and 
deduct 
income-tax, after giving 
effect to deduction under 
INCOME TAX LAW 
7.54
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold 
Limit for 
deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of 
TDS 
Time of 
deduction 
Other relevant points 
allowable 
should exceed 
the 
basic 
exemption 
limit. Further, 
in case the 
individual 
is 
entitled 
to 
rebate 
u/s 
87A from tax 
payable, then 
the 
same 
should 
be 
given 
effect 
to] 
Chapter 
VI-A,
if 
any 
allowable (on the basis of 
evidence furnished by the 
specified senior citizen) 
and 
rebate 
allowable 
u/s 87A. 
[CBDT 
Notification 
No. 
99/2021 dated 2.9.2021] 
The provisions of section 
139, relating to filing of 
return, would not apply 
to 
a 
specified 
senior 
citizen 
for 
the 
A.Y. 
relevant to the P.Y. in 
which 
tax 
has 
been 
deducted u/s 194P(1). 
194Q Purchase 
of 
goods 
> ` 50 lakhs 
in a previous 
year
Buyer, who is 
responsible for 
paying any sum 
to any resident 
for purchase of 
goods. 
Any 
resident 
0.1% of 
sum 
exceeding  
` 50 lakhs 
At the time 
of credit of 
such 
sum 
to 
the 
account of 
the 
seller 
Non-applicability 
of 
TDS u/s 194Q 
Transactions on which 
(a) Tax 
is 
deductible
under 
any 
of 
the
provisions of the Act;
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
a
a
7. 55 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold 
Limit for 
deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of 
TDS 
Time of 
deduction 
Other relevant points 
Buyer means a 
person 
whose 
total 
sales, 
gross 
receipts 
or 
turnover 
from 
business 
exceeds 
` 
10 
crores 
during 
the 
FY 
immediately 
preceding 
the 
FY in which the 
purchase 
of 
goods is carried 
out. 
or at the 
time 
of 
payment, 
whichever 
is earlier. 
(b) Tax is collectible u/s
206C, 
other 
than
section 206C(1H)
In case of a transaction to 
which 
both 
section 
206(1H) and section 194Q 
applies, tax is required to 
be deducted u/s 194Q. 
Other points 
Where 
the 
sum 
is 
credited to any account, 
whether called “Suspense 
account” or by any other 
name, in the books of 
account of the person 
liable 
to 
pay 
such 
income, 
such 
crediting 
shall be deemed to be 
credit to the account of 
the 
payee 
for 
the 
purposes of this section. 
INCOME TAX LAW 
7.56
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold 
Limit for 
deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of 
TDS 
Time of 
deduction 
Other relevant points 
194R Any 
benefit 
or perquisite, 
whether 
convertible 
into money or 
not, 
arising 
from business 
or 
the 
exercise of a 
profession. 
The 
provisions 
would 
apply 
to any benefit 
or perquisite, 
whether 
in 
cash 
or 
in 
kind or partly 
in cash and 
partly in kind. 
Value 
or 
aggregate of 
value 
of 
benefit 
or 
perquisite > 
` 20,000 in a 
F.Y. 
Any 
person 
(other than an 
individual 
or 
HUF 
whose 
total 
sales, 
gross 
receipts 
or 
turnover 
does 
not 
exceed 
` 1 crore in 
case 
of 
business 
or 
` 50 lakhs in 
case 
of 
profession 
during 
the 
immediately 
preceding F.Y.)
responsible for 
providing to a 
resident, 
any 
benefit 
or 
perquisite. 
Any 
resident 
10% of 
value or 
aggre. of 
value of 
such 
benefit or 
perquisite 
Before 
providing 
such 
benefit 
or 
perquisite 
Where 
the 
benefit 
or 
perquisite is wholly in 
kind or partly in cash and 
partly in kind but the part 
in cash is not sufficient to 
meet 
the 
liability 
of 
deduction 
of 
tax 
in 
respect of whole of such 
benefit or perquisite, the 
person 
responsible 
for 
providing such benefit or 
perquisite shall, before 
releasing the benefit or 
perquisite, 
ensure 
that 
tax has been paid in 
respect of the benefit or 
perquisite. 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
a
a
7. 57 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold 
Limit for 
deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of 
TDS 
Time of 
deduction 
Other relevant points 
In case of a 
company, 
“person 
responsible for 
paying” means 
the 
company 
itself including 
the 
Principal 
Officer thereof. 
INCOME TAX LAW 
7.58
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ILLUSTRATION 10 
Examine the applicability of the provisions for tax deduction at source under section 
194DA in the following cases - 
(i)
Mr. X, a resident, is due to receive ` 4.50 lakhs on 31.3.2024, towards maturity
proceeds of LIC policy taken on 1.4.2021, for which the sum assured is ` 4
lakhs and the annual premium is ` 1,25,000.
(ii)
Mr. Y, a resident, is due to receive ` 3.95 lakhs on 31.3.2024 on LIC policy
taken on 31.3.2012, for which the sum assured is ` 3.50 lakhs and the annual
premium is ` 26,100.
(iii)
Mr. Z, a resident, is due to receive ` 95,000 on 1.8.2023 towards maturity
proceeds of LIC policy taken on 1.8.2017 for which the sum assured is
` 90,000 and the annual premium was ` 10,000.
SOLUTION 
(i)
Since the annual premium exceeds 10% of sum assured in respect of a
policy taken after 31.3.2012, the maturity proceeds of ` 4.50 lakhs due on
31.3.2024 are not exempt under section 10(10D) in the hands of Mr. X.
Therefore, tax is required to be deducted@5% under section 194DA on the
amount of income comprised therein i.e., on ` 75,000 (` 4,50,000, being
maturity proceeds - ` 3,75,000, being the aggregate amount of insurance
premium paid).
(ii)
Since the annual premium is less than 20% of sum assured in respect of a
policy taken before 1.4.2012, the sum of ` 3.95 lakhs due to Mr. Y would be
exempt under section 10(10D) in his hands. Hence, no tax is required to be
deducted at source under section 194DA on such sum payable to Mr. Y.
(iii)
Even though the annual premium exceeds 10% of sum assured in respect of
a policy taken after 31.3.2012, and consequently, the maturity proceeds of
` 95,000 due on 1.8.2023 would not be exempt under section 10(10D) in the
hands of Mr. Z, the tax deduction provisions under section 194DA are not
attracted since the maturity proceeds are less than ` 1 lakh.
ILLUSTRATION 11 
Mr. X sold his house property in Bangalore as well as his rural agricultural land for 
a consideration of ` 60 lakh and ` 15 lakh, respectively, to Mr. Y on 1.8.2023. He 
has purchased the house property and the land in the year 2022 for ` 40 lakh and 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
a
a
7. 59 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.60 
` 10 lakh, respectively. The stamp duty value on the date of transfer, i.e., 1.8.2023, 
is ` 85 lakh and ` 20 lakh for the house property and rural agricultural land, 
respectively.  Examine the tax implications in the hands of Mr. X and Mr. Y and the 
TDS implications, if any, in the hands of Mr. Y, assuming that both Mr. X and Mr. Y 
are resident Indians.  
SOLUTION 
(i) 
Tax implications in the hands of Mr. X 
As per section 50C, the stamp duty value of house property (i.e. ` 85 lakh) 
would be deemed to be the full value of consideration arising on transfer 
of property, since the stamp duty value exceeds 110% of the 
consideration received. Therefore, ` 45 lakh (i.e., ` 85 lakh – ` 40 lakh, 
being the purchase price) would be taxable as short-term capital gains in 
the A.Y.2024-25. 
Since rural agricultural land is not a capital asset, the gains arising on sale 
of such land is not taxable in the hands of Mr. X. 
(ii) 
Tax implications in the hands of Mr. Y 
In case immovable property is received for inadequate consideration, the 
difference between the stamp value and actual consideration would be 
taxable under section 56(2)(x), if such difference exceeds the higher of 
` 50,000 and 10% of the consideration. 
Therefore, in this case ` 25 lakh (` 85 lakh – ` 60 lakh) would be taxable in 
the hands of Mr. Y under section 56(2)(x). 
Since agricultural land is not a capital asset, the provisions of section 
56(2)(x) are not attracted in respect of receipt of agricultural land for 
inadequate consideration, since the definition of “property” under section 
56(2)(x) includes only capital assets specified thereunder. 
(iii) TDS implications in the hands of Mr. Y 
Since the sale consideration of house property or the stamp duty value of 
house property exceeds ` 50 lakh, Mr. Y is required to deduct tax at 
source under section 194-IA. The tax to be deducted under section 194-IA 
would be ` 85,000, being 1% of ` 85 lakhs (higher of ` 60 lakhs or ` 85 
lakhs). 
TDS provisions under section 194-IA are not attracted in respect of 
transfer of rural agricultural land. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
7.61 
ILLUSTRATION 12 
Mr. Sharma, a resident Indian aged 77 years, gets pension of ` 52,000 per month 
from the UP State Government.  The same is credited to his savings account in 
SBI, Lucknow Branch.  In addition, he gets interest@8% p.a. on fixed deposit of 
` 20 lakh with the said bank.  Out of the deposit of ` 20 lakh, ` 2 lakh represents 
five year term deposit made by him on 1.4.2023. Interest on savings bank credited 
to his SBI savings account for the P.Y.2023-24 is ` 9,500.   
(1)
From the above facts, compute the total income and tax liability of
Mr. Sharma for the A.Y. 2024-25, assuming that he has exercised the option of
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
(2)
What would be the amount of tax deductible at source by SBI, assuming that
the same is a specified bank? Is Mr. Sharma required to file his return of
income for A.Y.2024-25, if tax deductible at source has been fully deducted?
Examine.
(3)
Is Mr. Sharma required to file his return of income for A.Y. 2024-25, if the
fixed deposit of ` 20 lakh was with Canara Bank instead of SBI, other facts
remaining the same?
SOLUTION 
(1)
Computation of total income of Mr. Sharma for A.Y.2024-25
Particulars 
` 
` 
I 
Salaries 
Pension (`  52,000 x 12) 
6,24,000 
Less: Standard deduction u/s 16(ia) 
   50,000 
5,74,000 
II 
Income from Other Sources 
Interest on fixed deposit (` 20 lakhx8%) 
1,60,000 
Interest on savings account 
   9,500 
 1,69,500 
Gross total income 
7,43,500 
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A 
Under Section 80C 
Five year term deposit (` 2 lakh, 
restricted to ` 1.5 lakh) 
1,50,000 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.62 
Under section 80TTB 
Interest on fixed deposit and savings 
account, 
restricted 
to 
50,000, 
since 
Mr. Sharma is a resident Indian of the age 
of 77 years. 
  50,000 
2,00,000 
Total Income 
5,43,500 
Computation of tax liability for A.Y.2024-25 
Particulars 
` 
Tax payable [` 43,500 x 20% + ` 10,000] 
18,700 
Add: Health and Education Cess@4% 
 748 
Tax liability 
19,448 
Tax liability (rounded off) 
19,450 
(2)
SBI, being a specified bank, is required to deduct tax at source u/s 194P and
remit the same to the Central Government. In such a case, Mr. Sharma
would not be required to file his return of income u/s 139.
(3)
If the fixed deposit of ` 20 lakh is with a bank other than SBI, which is the
bank where his pension is credited, then, Mr. Sharma would not qualify as a
“specified senior citizen”. In this case, Mr. Sharma would have to file his
return of income u/s 139, since his total income (without giving effect to
deduction under Chapter VI-A) exceeds the basic exemption limit.
3.12 Income payable “net of tax” [Section 195A] 
(1)
Where, under an agreement or other arrangement, the tax chargeable on
any income referred to in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter is to be
borne by the person by whom the income is payable, then, for the purposes
of deduction of tax under those provisions such income shall be increased
to such amount as would, after deduction of tax thereon, be equal to the
net amount payable under such agreement or arrangement.
(2)
However, no grossing up is required in the case of tax paid under section
192(1A) by an employer on the non-monetary perquisites provided to the
employee.
(3)
When an amount is paid net of tax, the taxability has to be calculated by
grossing up the amount, since the tax itself represents the income of the
payee.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
7.63 
3.13 Interest or dividend or other sums payable to 
Government, Reserve Bank or certain corporations 
[Section 196] 
(1)
No deduction of tax shall be made by any person from any sums payable to -
(i)
the Government; or
(ii)
the Reserve Bank of India; or
(iii)
a corporation established by or under a Central Act, which is, under any
law for the time being in force, exempt from income-tax on its income; or
(iv)
a Mutual Fund1.
(2)
This provision for non-deduction is applicable when such sum is payable to
the above entities by way of -
(i)
interest or dividend in respect of securities or shares -
(a)
owned by the above entities; or
(b)
in which they have full beneficial interest or
(ii)
any income accruing or arising to them.
4.
CERTIFICATE FOR DEDUCTION OF TAX AT A
LOWER RATE [SECTION 197]
(1)
This section applies where, in the case of any income of any person or sum
payable to any person, income-tax is required to be deducted at the time of
credit or payment, as the case may be, at the rates in force as per the
provisions of sections 192, 193, 194, 194A, 194C, 194D, 194G, 194H, 194-I,
194J, 194K, 194LA and 194M.
(2)
In such cases, the assessee can make an application to the Assessing Officer
for deduction of tax at a lower rate or for non-deduction of tax.
(3)
If the Assessing Officer is satisfied that the total income of the recipient
justifies the deduction of income-tax at lower rates or no deduction of
income-tax, as the case may be, he may give to the assessee such
certificate, as may be appropriate.
1  Specified under section 10(23D) 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.64 
(4)
Where the Assessing Officer issues such a certificate, then the person
responsible for paying the income shall deduct income-tax at such lower
rates specified in the certificate or deduct no tax, as the case may be, until
such certificate is cancelled by the Assessing Officer.
(5)
Enabling powers have been conferred upon the CBDT to make rules for
prescribing the procedure in this regard.
5.
NO
DEDUCTION 
IN 
CERTAIN 
CASES 
[SECTION 197A] 
(1)
Enabling provision for filing of declaration for receipt of dividend
without deduction of tax [Sub-section (1)]
(i)
This section enables an individual, who is resident in India and whose
estimated total income of the previous year is less than the basic
exemption limit, to receive dividend, without deduction of tax at
source under section 194 on furnishing a declaration in duplicate in
the prescribed form [Form 15G] and verified in the prescribed manner.
(ii)
The declaration in the above form is to be furnished in writing in
duplicate by the declarant to the person responsible for paying any
income of the nature referred to in section 194. The declaration will
have to be to the effect that the tax on the estimated total income of
the declarant of the previous year in which such income is to be
included in computing his total income will be Nil.
(2)
Enabling provision for filing of declaration for non-deduction of tax
under section 192A or 193 or 194A or 194D or 194DA or 194-I or 194K
by persons, other than companies and firms [Sub-section (1A)]
No deduction of tax shall be made under the above provisions of the Act,
where a person, who is not a company or a firm, furnishes to the person
responsible for paying any income of the nature referred to in these
sections, a declaration in writing in duplicate in the prescribed form [Form
15G] to the effect that the tax on his estimated total income of the previous
year in which such income is to be included in computing his total income
will be Nil.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
7.65 
(3)
Filing declaration not permissible if income/aggregate of incomes
exceed basic exemption limit [Sub-section (1B)]
Declaration cannot be furnished as per the above provisions, where -
(i)
payments of dividend; or
(ii)
payment of premature withdrawal from Employee Provident Fund; or
(iii)
income from interest on securities or
(iv)
interest other than “interest on securities” or units; or
(v)
insurance commission; or
(vi)
payment in respect of life insurance policy; or
(vii)
rent; or
(viii) income from units; or
(ix)
the aggregate of the amounts of such incomes in (i) to (viii) above
credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid during the previous year in 
which such income is to be included exceeds the basic exemption limit. 
(4)
Enabling provision for filing of declaration by resident senior citizens
for non-deduction of tax at source [Sub-section (1C)]
For a resident individual, who is of the age of 60 years or more at any time
during the previous year, no deduction of tax shall be made under section
192A or section 193 or section 194 or section 194A or section 194D or
section 194DA or section 194EE or section 194-I or section 194K, if such
individual furnishes a declaration in writing in duplicate in Form 15H to the
payer, that tax on his estimated total income of the previous year in which
such income is to be included in computing his total income is Nil. The
restriction contained in sub-section (1B) will not apply to resident senior
citizens.
(5)
Non-deduction of tax in certain cases
Payments 
to 
notified 
person 
or 
class 
of 
persons 
including
institutions/class of institutions etc. [Sub-section (1F)]
No deduction of tax shall be made or deduction of tax shall be made at
such lower rate, from such payment to such person or class of persons,
including institution, association or body or class of institutions or
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.66 
associations or bodies as may be notified by the Central Government in the 
Official Gazette in this behalf. Therefore, in respect of such payments made 
to notified person or class of persons, no tax is to be deducted at source or 
tax is to be deducted at lower rate.  
(6)
Time limit for delivery of one copy of declaration [Sub-section (2)]
On receipt of the declaration referred to in sub-sections (1), (1A) or (1C), the
person responsible for making the payment will be required to deliver or
cause to be delivered to the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, one copy of the
declaration on or before the 7th of the month following the month in
which the declaration is furnished to him. 
6.
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
6.1 Tax deducted is income received [Section 198] 
(1)
All sums deducted in accordance with the foregoing provisions shall, for the
purpose of computing the income of an assessee, be deemed to be income
received.
(2)
However, the following tax paid or deducted would not be deemed to be
income received by the assessee for the purpose of computing the total
income –
(i)
the tax paid by an employer under section 192(1A) on non-monetary
perquisites provided to the employees
(ii)
tax deducted under section 194N
6.2 Credit for tax deducted at source [Section 199] 
(1)
Tax deducted at source in accordance with the above provisions and paid to
the credit of the Central Government shall be treated as payment of tax on
behalf of the-
(i)
person from whose income the deduction was made; or
(ii)
owner of the security; or
(iii)
depositor; or
(iv)
owner of property; or
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.67 
(v)  
unit-holder; or 
(vi)  shareholder. 
 
 
(2) 
Any sum referred to in section 192(1A) and paid to the Central Government, 
shall be treated as the tax paid on behalf of the person in respect of whose 
income, such payment of tax has been made. 
(3) 
The CBDT is empowered to frame rules for the purpose of giving credit in 
respect of tax deducted or tax paid under Chapter XVII. The CBDT also has 
the power to make rules for giving credit to a person other than the persons 
mentioned in (1) and (2) above.  Further, the CBDT can specify the 
assessment year for which such credit may be given. 
6.3 Duty of person deducting tax [Section 200] 
(1) 
The persons responsible for deducting the tax at source should deposit the 
sum so deducted to the credit of the Central Government or as the Board 
directs, within the prescribed time. 
(2) 
Further, an employer paying tax on non-monetary perquisites provided to 
employees in accordance with section 192(1A), should deposit within the 
prescribed time, the tax to the credit of the Central Government or as the 
Board directs. 
(3) 
Rule 30 prescribes the time and mode of payment to Government account 
of TDS or tax paid under section 192(1A) and Rule 31A provides for 
submission of quarterly statements by every person responsible for 
deduction of tax [depicted in the diagram given in page 7.73]  
However, every person responsible for deduction of tax under section 194-
IA, 194-IB or 194M have to furnish to the Principal Director General of 
Income-tax (Systems) (in case of sections 194-IB and 194M) or Director 
General of Income-tax (System) or the person authorised by them, a 
challan-cum-statement in Form No.26QB, 26QC or 26QD respectively, within 
thirty days from the end of the month of deduction of tax. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.68 
6.4 Correction of arithmetic mistakes and adjustment of 
incorrect claim during computerized processing of TDS 
statements [Section 200A] 
(1)
At present, all statements of tax deducted at source are filed in an electronic
mode, thereby facilitating computerised processing of these statements.
Therefore, in order to process TDS statements on computer, electronic
processing on the same lines as processing of income-tax returns has been
provided in section 200A.
(2)
The following adjustments can be made during the computerized
processing of statement of tax deducted at source or a correction statement
–
(i)
any arithmetical error in the statement; or
(ii)
an incorrect claim, if such incorrect claim is apparent from any
information in the statement.
(3)
The term “an incorrect claim apparent from any information in the
statement” shall mean such claim on the basis of an entry, in the
statement,–
(i)
of an item, which is inconsistent with another entry of the same or
some other item in such statement;
(ii)
in respect of rate of deduction of tax at source, where such rate is not
in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
(4)
The interest, if any, has to be computed on the basis of the sums deductible
as computed in the statement;
(5)
The fee, if any, has to be computed in accordance with the provision of
section 234E. A fee of ` 200 for every day would be levied under section
234E for late furnishing of TDS statement from the due date of furnishing of
TDS statement to the date of furnishing of TDS/ statement.  However, the total
amount of fee shall not exceed the total amount of tax deductible/collectible
and such fee has to be paid before delivering the TDS statement.
(6)
The sum payable by, or the amount of refund due to, the deductor has to
be determined after adjustment of interest and fee against the amount paid
under section 200 or section 201 or section 234E and any amount paid
otherwise by way of tax or interest or fee.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.69 
(7) 
An intimation will be prepared and generated and sent to the deductor, 
specifying his tax liability or the refund due, within one year from the end of 
the financial year in which the statement is filed. The refund due shall be 
granted to the deductor. 
(8) 
For this purpose, the CBDT is empowered to make a scheme for centralized 
processing of statements of TDS to determine the tax payable by, or refund 
due to, the deductor. 
6.5 Consequences of failure to deduct or pay [Section 201] 
(1) 
Deemed assessee-in-default 
 
Any person including the principal officer of a company - 
(i) 
who is required to deduct any sum in accordance with the provisions 
of the Act; or 
(ii) 
an employer paying tax on non-monetary perquisites under section 
192(1A). 
shall be deemed to be an assessee-in-default, if he does not deduct, or 
does not pay or after deducting, fails to pay, the whole or any part of the 
tax, as required by or under the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
(2) 
Non-applicability of deeming provision 
 
Any person (including the principal officer of the company) who fails to 
deduct the whole or any part of the tax on the amount credited or paid to a 
payee shall not be deemed to be an assessee-in-default in respect of such 
tax if such payee – 
(i) 
has furnished his return of income under section 139; 
(ii) 
has taken into account such sum for computing income in such return 
of income; and 
(iii) 
has paid the tax due on the income declared by him in such return of 
income, 
 
and the payer furnishes a certificate to this effect from an accountant in 
such form as may be prescribed. 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.70 
(3)
Interest Liability
(i)
A person deemed to be an assessee-in-default under section 201(1),
for failure to deduct tax or to pay the tax after deduction, is liable to
pay simple interest @ 1% for every month or part of month on the
amount of such tax from the date on which tax was deductible to the
date on which such tax was actually deducted and simple interest
@ 1½%  for every month or part of month from the date on which tax 
was deducted to the date on which such tax is actually paid [Section 
201(1A)]. 
(ii)
Such interest should be paid before furnishing the statements in
accordance with section 200(3).
(iii)
Where the payer fails to deduct the whole or any part of the tax on
the amount credited or payment made to a payee and is not deemed
to be an assessee-in-default under section 201(1) on account of
payment of taxes by such payee, interest under section 201(1A)(i)
i.e.,@1% p.m. or part of month, shall be payable by the payer from the
date on which such tax was deductible to the date of furnishing of
return of income by such payee. The date of deduction and payment
of taxes by the payer shall be deemed to be the date on which return
of income has been furnished by the payee.
However, where an order is made by the Assessing Officer for 
assessee-in-default, the interest shall be paid by the person in 
accordance with such order. 
(iv)
Where the tax has not been paid after it is deducted, the amount of the
tax together with the amount of simple interest thereon shall be a charge
upon all the assets of the person or the company, as the case may be.
6.6 Certificate for tax deducted [Section 203] 
(1)
Every person deducting tax at source have to issue a certificate to the effect
that tax has been deducted and specify the amount so deducted, the rate at
which tax has been deducted and such other particulars as may be
prescribed.
(2)
Every person, being an employer, referred to in section 192(1A) shall, within
such period, as may be prescribed, furnish to the person in respect of whose
income such payment of tax has been made, a certificate to the effect that
tax has been paid to the Central Government, and specify the amount so
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.71 
paid, the rate at which the tax has been paid and such other particulars as 
may be prescribed. 
(3)  Certificate of TDS to be furnished under section 203 [Rule 31] 
 
The certificate of deduction of tax at source to be furnished under section 
203 shall be in Form No.16 in respect of tax deducted or paid under section 
192 and in any other case, Form No.16A. 
 
Form No.16 shall be issued to the employee annually by 15th June of the 
financial year immediately following the financial year in which the income 
was paid and tax deducted. Form No.16A shall be issued quarterly within 15 
days from the due date for furnishing the statement of TDS under Rule 31A. 
 
Form No. 16B, 16C or 16D shall be issued by the every person responsible 
for deduction of tax under section 194-IA, 194-IB or 194M to the payee 
within fifteen days from the due date for furnishing the challan-cum-
statement in Form No. 26QB, 26QC or 26QD, respectively, under rule 31A.  
Note – The entire TDS process can be understood at a glance from the 
diagram given in the next page. The reference to Rules and Forms are only for 
the information of students. They are, however, not required to memorize the 
Rule numbers and Form numbers for examination purposes. 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.72 
Deduction of tax at source 
Sections 193, 194A, 194C, 194D, 194G, 194H, 194-
I/IA/IB, 194J, 194K, 194M, 194Q 
Sections 192, 192A, 194, 194B, 194BB, 194DA,  194LA, 
194N, 194P2, 194R 
Deduct tax at the time of credit to the 
a/c of the payee or payment, 
whichever is earlier 
Deduct tax at the time of payment 
Remittance [Rule 30] 
Tax deducted by an office of Govt. 
Other deductors 
Where tax is 
paid without 
production of 
challan 
Where tax is paid 
accompanied by 
an IT challan 
(i) Cases (other than
(ii), (iii) & (iv) 
# (ii) 
u/s 
192/ 
194A/ 
194D/ 
194H 
(iii) 
u/s 
194-
IA 
(iv) 
u/s 
194-
IB 
(iv) 
u/s 
194M 
Income/Amt is 
credited or paid in 
March 
Any other 
month 
On the same day 
On or before 7 
days from the 
end of the month 
of deduction 
Qtly payt 
7th July/ 
7th Oct/ 7th 
Jan/ 30th 
April 
30 days from the end of the 
month of deduction 
30th 
April 
On or before 7 
days from the 
end of the 
month of 
dedn. 
PAO/TO/CDDO 
Furnishing Stt of TDS [Rule 31A] 
[Form 24Q3/27Q4/26Q5] 
Rule 31A - Furnish Challan-
cum-stt in Form 
26QB/26QC/26QD with 30 
days from the end of the 
month of deduction 
Qtr ending 
Due date 
Submit Statement in Form 24G to 
agency authorised by PDIT (Sys) 
30th June 
31st July 
30th Sep 
31st Oct 
31st Dec 
31st Jan 
31St March 
31st May 
Where 
Stt 
relates to 
March 
Where Stt 
relates to 
other months 
Furnishing Certificate of TDS  
[Rule 31] 
Rule 
31 
-Furnish 
Certificate to the payee 
within 15 days from the 
above due date in Form 
16B/16C/16D 
Deduction u/s 192 or 
194P 
Deduction under 
other sections 
Form 16 
Form 16A 
On or 
before 
30th April 
On or before 
15 days from 
end of the 
relevant month 
By 15th June of the 
immediately following 
F.Y. 
Within 15 days from 
the due date for 
furnishing TDS 
statement 
# In special cases, the A.O. may, 
with the prior approval of the JC, 
permit quarterly payment of TDS 
2 TDS is required to be deducted at the time of payment, if declaration is furnished by the specified senior citizen  
3 If deduction of tax is under section 192 or 194P 
4 If deduction of tax is u/s 193 to 196D other than section 194P in respect of deductee who is a non-corporate non-
resident or a foreign company or RNOR 
5 If deduction of tax is u/s 193 to 196D other than section 194P in respect of all other deductees 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.73 
6.7  Person responsible for paying taxes deducted at source  
[Section 204] 
For purposes of deduction of tax at source the expression “person responsible 
for paying” means: 
 
Nature of income/payment 
Person responsible for paying tax 
(1) 
Salary (other than payment of 
salaries by the Central or State 
Government) 
(i) the employer himself; or 
(ii) if the employer is a company, the 
company 
itself, 
including 
the 
principal officer thereof. 
(2) 
Interest on securities (other than 
payments by or on behalf of the 
Central or State Government) 
the local authority, corporation or 
company, 
including 
the 
principal 
officer thereof. 
(3) 
Any sum payable to a non-
resident 
Indian, 
representing 
consideration for the transfer by 
him of any foreign exchange 
asset, which is not a short term 
capital asset 
the “Authorised Person” responsible for 
remitting such sum to the non-resident 
Indian or for crediting such sum to his 
Non-resident 
(External) 
Account 
maintained in accordance with the 
Foreign Exchange Management Act, 
1999 and any rules made thereunder. 
(4) 
furnishing 
of 
information 
relating to payment to a non-
corporate non-resident, or to a 
foreign company, of any sum, 
whether 
or 
not 
chargeable 
under the provisions of this Act 
(i)  the payer himself; or 
(ii) if the payer is a company, the 
company 
itself 
including 
the 
principal officer thereof. 
(5) 
Credit/payment of any other 
sum 
chargeable 
under 
the 
provisions of the Act 
(i)  the payer himself; or 
(ii)  if the payer is a company, the 
company 
itself 
including 
the 
principal officer thereof. 
(6) 
Credit/payment 
of 
any 
sum 
chargeable under the provisions 
of the Act made by or on behalf 
of the Central Government or 
the Government of a State. 
(i) the 
drawing 
and 
disbursing 
officer; or 
(ii)  any other person, by whatever 
name 
called, 
responsible 
for 
crediting, or as the case may be, 
paying such sum. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.74 
(7) 
In case of a person not resident 
in India (irrespective of the 
nature of payment or income) 
(i)
the person himself; or
(ii)
any person authorized by such
person; or
(iii) the agent of such person in India
including any person treated as an
agent under section 163.
6.8 Bar against direct demand on assessee [Section 205] 
Where tax is deductible at source under any of the aforesaid sections, the 
assessee shall not be called upon to pay the tax himself to the extent to which tax 
has been deducted from that income. 
6.9 Mandatory requirement of furnishing PAN in all TDS 
statements, bills, vouchers and correspondence between 
deductor and deductee [Section 206AA] 
(1)
The non-furnishing of PAN by deductees in many cases have led to delay in
issue of refund on account of problems in the processing of returns of
income and in granting credit for tax deducted at source.
(2)
With a view to strengthening the PAN mechanism, section 206AA provides
that any person whose receipts are subject to deduction of tax at source i.e.
the deductee, shall mandatorily furnish his PAN to the deductor failing
which the deductor shall deduct tax at source at higher of the following
rates –
(i)
the rate prescribed in the Act;
(ii)
at the rate in force i.e., the rate mentioned in the Finance Act; or
(iii)
at the rate of 20%. [5% in case tax is required to be deducted at 
source u/s 194Q]
For instance, in case of rental payment for plant and machinery, where the 
payee does not furnish his PAN to the payer, tax would be deductible @20% 
instead of @2% prescribed under section 194-I. However, non-furnishing of 
PAN by the deductee in case of income by way of winnings from lotteries, 
card games etc., would result in tax being deducted at the existing rate of 
30% under section 194B. Therefore, wherever tax is deductible at a rate 
higher than 20%, this provision would not have any impact.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.75 
(3)
Tax would be deductible at the rates mentioned above also in cases where 
the taxpayer files a declaration in Form 15G or 15H (under section 197A) but 
does not provide his PAN.  
(4)
Further, no certificate under section 197 will be granted by the Assessing 
Officer unless the application contains the PAN of the applicant. 
(5) 
Both the deductor and the deductee have to compulsorily quote the PAN of 
the deductee in all correspondence, bills, vouchers and other documents 
exchanged between them.  
(6)  
If the PAN provided to the deductor is invalid or it does not belong to the 
deductee, it shall be deemed that the deductee has not furnished his PAN to the 
deductor. Accordingly, tax would be deductible at the rate specified in (2) above.  
Note: The applicability of provisions of section 206AA on non-resident will be 
dealt with at the Final Level. 
6.10 Higher rate of TDS for non-filers of income-tax return 
[Section 206AB] 
(1)
Section 206AB requires tax to be deducted at source under the provisions of 
this Chapter on any sum or income or amount paid, or payable or credited, 
by a person to a specified person, at higher of the following rates – 
(i) 
at twice the rate prescribed in the relevant provisions of the Act;  
(ii)  
at twice the rate or rates in force i.e., the rate mentioned in the 
Finance Act; or  
(iii) 
at 5% 
However, section 206AB is not applicable in case of tax deductible at source 
under sections 192, 192A, 194B, 194BA, 194BB, 194-IA, 194-IB, 194M6 or 
194N. 
(2) 
In case the provisions of section 206AA are also applicable to the specified 
person, in addition to the provisions of this section, then, tax is required to 
be deducted at higher of the two rates provided in section 206AA and 
section 206AB. 
 
6 or section 194LBC (this section will be dealt with at the Final level) 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.76 
(3)
Meaning of “specified person” – A person who has not furnished the
return of income for assessment year relevant to the previous year
immediately preceding the financial year in which tax is required to be
deducted, for which the time limit for furnishing the return of income under
section 139(1) has expired, and the aggregate of tax deducted at source and
tax collected at source in his case is ` 50,000 or more in the said previous
year.
However, the specified person would not include
-
a non-resident who does not have a permanent establishment in India7;
or
-
a person who is not required to furnish the return of income for the
assessment year relevant to the said previous year and is notified by the
Central Government in this behalf.
7.
ADVANCE PAYMENT OF TAX [SECTIONS 207
TO 219]
7.1 Liability for payment of advance tax 
(1)
Tax shall be payable in advance during any financial year, in accordance
with the provisions of sections 208 to 219, in respect of an assessee’s
current income i.e. the total income of the assessee which would be
chargeable to tax for the assessment year immediately following that
financial year [Section 207].
(2)
Under section 208, obligation to pay advance tax arises in every case where
the advance tax payable is ` 10,000 or more.
Note - An assessee who is liable to pay advance tax of less than ` 10,000 will
not be saddled with interest under sections 234B and 234C for defaults in
payment of advance tax. However, the consequences under section 234A
regarding interest for belated filing of return would be attracted.
(3)
In case of senior citizens who have passive source of income like interest,
rent, etc., the requirement of payment of advance tax causes genuine
7“Permanent establishment” includes a fixed place of business through which the business of the enterprise 
is wholly or partly carried on.  This concept and related provisions will be dealt with at the Final level. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.77 
compliance hardship. Therefore, in order to reduce the compliance burden 
on such senior citizens, exemption from payment of advance tax has been 
provided to a resident individual- 
(i) 
not having any income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains 
of business or profession”; and 
(ii) 
of the age of 60 years or more.  
 
Such senior citizens need not pay advance tax and are allowed to discharge 
their tax liability (other than TDS) by payment of self-assessment tax. 
7.2 Computation of advance tax 
(1) 
An assessee has to estimate his current income and pay advance tax 
thereon. He need not submit any estimate or statement of income to the 
Assessing Officer, except where he has been served with notice by the 
Assessing Officer. 
(2) 
Where an obligation to pay advance tax has arisen, the assessee shall 
himself compute the advance tax payable on his current income at the rates 
in force in the financial year and deposit the same, whether or not he has 
been earlier assessed to tax. 
(3) 
In the case of a person who has been already assessed by way of a regular 
assessment in respect of the total income of any previous year, the 
Assessing Officer, if he is of the opinion that such person is liable to pay 
advance tax, may serve an order under section 210(3) requiring the assessee 
to pay advance tax.  
(4) 
For this purpose, the total income of the latest previous year in respect of 
which the assessee has been assessed by way of regular assessment or the 
total income returned by the assessee in any return of income for any 
subsequent previous year, whichever is higher, shall be taken as the basis 
for computation of advance tax payable. 
(5) 
The above order can be served by the Assessing Officer at any time during 
the financial year but not later than the last date of February. 
(6) 
If, after sending the above notice, but before 1st March of the financial year, 
the assessee furnishes a return relating to any later previous year or an 
assessment is completed in respect of a later return of income, the 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.78 
Assessing Officer may amend the order for payment of advance tax on the 
basis of the computation of the income so returned or assessed. 
(7)
If the assessee feels that his own estimate of advance tax payable would be
less than the one sent by the Assessing Officer, he can file estimate of his
current income and advance tax payable thereon.
(8)
Where the advance tax payable on assessee’s estimation is higher than the
tax computed by the Assessing Officer, then, the advance tax shall be paid
based upon such higher amount.
(9)
In all cases, the tax calculated shall be reduced by the amount of tax
deductible at source.
No reduction of ‘tax deductible but not deducted’ while computing 
advance tax liability 
(i)
As per the provisions of section 209, the amount of advance tax payable
by a person is computed by reducing the amount of income-tax which
would be deductible at source during the financial year from any income
which has been taken into account in computing the total income.
(ii)
Some courts have opined that in case where the payer pays any
amount (on which tax is deductible at source) without deduction of
tax at source, the payee shall not be liable to pay advance tax to the
extent tax is deductible from such amount.
(iii)
With a view to make such a person (payee) liable to pay advance tax,
the proviso to section 209(1)(d) provides that the amount of tax
deductible at source but not so deducted by the payer shall not be
reduced from the income tax liability of the payee for determining his
liability to pay advance tax.
(iv)
In effect, only if tax has actually been deducted at source, the same
can be reduced for computing advance tax liability of the payee. Tax
deductible but not so deducted cannot be reduced for computing
advance tax liability of the payee.
(10)
The amount of advance tax payable by an assessee in the financial year
calculated by -
(i)
the assessee himself based on his estimation of current income; or
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.79 
(ii) 
the Assessing Officer as a result of an order under section 210(3) or 
amended order under section 210(4) 
is subject to the provisions of section 209(2), as per which the net 
agricultural income has to be considered for the purpose of computing 
advance tax. 
7.3 Instalments of advance tax and due dates 
(1) 
Common advance tax payment schedule for both corporates and non-
corporates [Other than assessees computing profits on presumptive 
basis under section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1)]: 
Due date of instalment 
Amount payable 
On or before 15th June 
Not less than 15% of advance tax liability 
On 
or 
before 
15th 
September 
Not less than 45% of advance tax liability, 
as reduced by the amount, if any, paid in 
the earlier instalment. 
On 
or 
before 
15th 
December 
Not less than 75% of advance tax liability, 
as reduced by the amount or amounts, if 
any, paid in the earlier instalment or 
instalments. 
On or before 15th March 
The whole amount of advance tax liability 
as reduced by the amount or amounts, if 
any, paid in the earlier instalment or 
instalments. 
Note - Any amount paid by way of advance tax on or before 31st March 
shall also be treated as advance tax paid during each financial year ending 
on 31st March. 
(2) 
Advance tax payment by assessees computing profits on presumptive 
basis under section 44AD(1)or section 44ADA(1)  
 
An eligible assessee, opting for computation of profits or gains of business 
on presumptive basis in respect of eligible business referred to in section 
44AD(1) or for computation of profits or gains of profession on presumptive 
basis in respect of eligible profession referred to in section 44ADA(1), shall 
be required to pay advance tax of the whole amount in one instalment on 
or before 15th March of the financial year. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.80 
However, any amount paid by way of advance tax on or before 31st March 
shall also be treated as advance tax paid during each financial year ending 
on 31st March. 
(3)
If the last day for payment of any instalment of advance tax is a day on
which the receiving bank is closed, the assessee can make the payment on
the next immediately following working day, and in such cases, the interest
leviable under sections 234B and 234C would not be charged.
(4)
Where advance tax is payable by virtue of the notice of demand issued8 by
the Assessing Officer, the whole or the appropriate part of the advance tax
specified in such notice shall be payable on or before each of such due
dates as fall after the date of service of notice of demand.
(5)
Where the assessee does not pay any instalment by the due date, he shall
be deemed to be an assessee in default in respect of such instalment.
7.4 Credit for advance tax [Section 219] 
Any sum, other than interest or penalty, paid by or recovered from an assessee 
as advance tax, is treated as a payment of tax in respect of the income of the 
previous year and credit thereof shall be given in the regular assessment. 
7.5 Interest for non-payment or short-payment of advance 
tax [Section 234B] 
(1)
Interest under section 234B is attracted for non-payment of advance tax or
payment of advance tax of an amount less than 90% of assessed tax.
(2)
The interest liability would be 1% per month or part of the month from
1st April following the financial year upto the date of determination of
income under section 143(1) and where a regular assessment is made, upto
the date of such regular assessment.
(3)
Such interest is calculated on the amount of difference between the
assessed tax and the advance tax paid.
(4)
Assessed tax is the tax calculated on total income determined under section
143(1) and where a regular assessment is made, the tax on the total income
determined under such regular assessment less
8 under section 156 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
7.81 
-
tax deducted or collected at source.
-
any relief of tax allowed under section 89
-
any tax credit allowed to be set off in accordance with the provisions
of section 115JD, in case the assessee exercises the option of shifting
out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
Tax on the total income determined under section 143(1) would not include 
the additional income-tax, if any, payable under section 140B or section 143. 
Tax on the total income determined under such regular assessment would 
not include the additional income-tax, if any, payable under section 140B. 
Section 140B is discussed in detail in Chapter 8. 
(5)
However, where self-assessment tax is paid by the assessee under section
140A or otherwise, interest shall be calculated upto the date of payment of
such tax and reduced by the interest, if any, paid under section 140A
towards the interest chargeable under this section. Thereafter, interest shall
be calculated at 1% on the amount by which the tax so paid together with
the advance tax paid falls short of the assessed tax.
7.6 Interest 
payable 
for 
deferment 
of 
advance 
tax 
[Section 234C] 
(1)
Manner of computation of interest under section 234C for deferment
of advance tax by corporate and non-corporate assessees:
In case an assessee, other than an assessee who declares profits and
gains in accordance with the provisions of section 44AD(1) or section
44ADA(1), who is liable to pay advance tax under section 208 has failed to
pay such tax or the advance tax paid by such assessee on its current
income on or before the  dates specified in column (1) is less than the
specified percentage [given in column (2)] of tax due on returned income,
then simple interest@1% per month for the period specified in column (4)
on the amount of shortfall, as per column (3) is leviable under section
234C.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.82 
Specified 
date 
Specified
% 
Shortfall in advance tax 
Period 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
15th June 
15% 
15% of tax due on returned 
income (-) advance tax paid up 
to 15th June 
3 months 
15th 
September 
45% 
45% of tax due on returned 
income (-) advance tax paid up 
to 15th September 
3 months 
15th 
December 
75% 
75% of tax due on returned 
income (-) advance tax paid up 
to 15th December 
3 months 
15th March 
100% 
100% of tax due on returned 
income (-) advance tax paid up 
to 15th March 
1 month 
Note – However, if the advance tax paid by the assessee on the current 
income, on or before 15th June or 15th September, is not less than 12% or 
36% of the tax due on the returned income, respectively, then, the assessee 
shall not be liable to pay any interest on the amount of the shortfall on 
those dates. 
(2)
Computation of interest under section 234C in case of an assessee who
declares profits and gains in accordance with the provisions of section
44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1):
In case an assessee who declares profits and gains in accordance with the
section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1), as the case may be, who is liable to
pay advance tax under section 208 has failed to pay such tax or the advance
tax paid by the assessee on its current income on or before 15th March is
less than the tax due on the returned income, then, the assessee shall be
liable to pay simple interest at the rate of 1% on the amount of the shortfall
from the tax due on the returned income.
(3)
Non-applicability of interest under section 234C in certain cases:
Interest under section 234C shall not be leviable in respect of any shortfall
in payment of tax due on returned income, where such shortfall is on
account of under-estimation of or failure to estimate –
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.83 
(i) 
the amount of capital gains; 
(ii) 
income of nature referred to in section 2(24)(ix) i.e., winnings from 
lotteries, crossword puzzles etc.;  
(iii) 
income under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” in cases 
where the income accrues or arises under the said head for the first time. 
(iv) 
the amount of dividend income other than deemed dividend referred 
u/s 2(22)(e) 
 
However, the assessee should have paid the whole of the amount of tax 
payable in respect of such income referred to in (i), (ii), (iii) or (iv), as the 
case may be, had such income been a part of the total income, as part of 
the remaining instalments of advance tax which are due or where no such 
instalments are due, by 31st March of the financial year. 
(4)  Meaning of tax due on returned income  
 
Tax due on returned income means the tax calculated on total income 
declared in the return furnished by the assessee less  
-
tax deducted or collected at source 
-
any relief of tax allowed under section 89 
-
any tax credit allowed to be set off in accordance with the provisions 
of section 115JD, in case the assessee exercises the option of shifting 
out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). 
8. 
TAX COLLECTION AT SOURCE  
(1) 
Applicability and Rates 
(i)  
Sale of certain goods  
Under section 206C(1), sellers of certain goods are required to collect 
tax from the buyers at the specified rates. The specified percentage for 
collection of tax at source is as follows: 
 
Nature of Goods 
Percentage 
(a) 
Alcoholic liquor for human consumption             
1% 
(b) Tendu leaves 
5% 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
 
7.84 
(c) 
Timber obtained under a forest lease 
2.5% 
(d) Timber obtained by any mode other than (c) 
2.5% 
(e) 
Any other forest produce not being timber or 
tendu leaves 
2.5% 
(f) 
Scrap 
1% 
(g) Minerals, being coal or lignite or iron ore 
1% 
The tax should be collected at the time of debiting of the amount 
payable by the buyer to his account or at the time of receipt of such 
amount from the buyer, whichever is earlier.  
Non-applicability of TCS u/s 206C(1) [Section 206C(1A)] 
No collection of tax shall be made under section 206C(1), in the case 
of a resident buyer, if such buyer furnishes to the person responsible 
for collecting tax, a declaration in writing in duplicate in the 
prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner to the effect 
that goods referred to in section 206C(1) above are to be utilised for 
the purpose of manufacturing, processing or producing articles or 
things or for the purposes of generation of power and not for trading 
purposes. 
(ii)  Lease or a licence of parking lot, toll plaza or mine or a quarry  
 
Section 206C(1C) provides for collection of tax by every person who 
grants a lease or a licence or enters into a contract or otherwise 
transfers any right or interest in any  
-
parking lot or  
-
toll plaza or  
-
a mine or a quarry  
 
to another person (other than a public sector company) for the use of 
such parking lot or toll plaza or mine or quarry for the purposes of 
business. The tax shall be collected as provided, from the licensee or 
lessee of any such licence, contract or lease of the specified nature, at 
the rate of 2%. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
7.85 
Mining and quarrying would not include mining and quarrying of 
mineral oil. Mineral oil includes petroleum and natural gas. 
The tax should be collected at the time of debiting of the amount 
payable by the licensee or lessee to his account or at the time of 
receipt of such amount from the licensee or lessee, whichever is 
earlier.  
(iii)
Sale of motor vehicle of value exceeding ` 10 lakhs
Section 206C(1F) provides that every person, being a seller, who
receives any amount as consideration for sale of a motor vehicle of
the value exceeding ` 10 lakhs, shall, at the time of receipt of such
amount, collect tax from the buyer@1% of the sale consideration.
(iv)
Remittance under LRS of RBI through an authorized dealer or
purchase of an overseas tour package
Section 206C(1G) provides for collection of tax by every person,
-
being an authorized dealer, who receives amount, under the
Liberalised Remittance Scheme of the RBI, for remittance from a
buyer, being a person remitting such amount;
-
being a seller of an overseas tour programme package who
receives any amount from the buyer who purchases the package
Tax has to be collected at the time of debiting the amount payable by 
the buyer or at the time of receipt of such amount from the said 
buyer, by any mode, whichever is earlier. 
Rate of TCS in case of collection by an authorized dealer/ seller of 
an overseas tour programme package 
S. 
No. 
Amount and purpose of 
remittance 
Rate of 
TCS 
upto 
30.9.2023 
Rate of 
TCS 
on or 
after 
1.10.2023 
(i) 
Where the amount is for purchase 
of an overseas tour programme 
package 
5% 
of 
such 
amount 
(without 
5%  till ` 7
lakhs, 
20% thereafter 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.86 
any 
threshold 
limit) 
(ii) 
(a) Where the amount is remitted
for the purpose of education or
medical treatment; and
(b)  the amount or aggregate of the
amounts being remitted by a
buyer is less than ` 7 lakhs in a
financial year
Nil 
(No tax to be collected 
at source) 
(iii) 
(a)
(b)
Where the amount is remitted 
for 
the 
purpose 
other 
than 
mentioned in (ii)  above; and
 the amount or aggregate of the 
amounts being remitted by a 
buyer is less than ` 7 lakhs in a 
financial year
(iv) 
(a)  where the amount is remitted
for the purpose of education or
medical treatment; and
(b)  the amount or aggregate of the
amounts in excess of ` 7 lakhs
is remitted by the buyer in a
financial year
5% of the amt or agg. 
of amts in excess of ` 7 
lakh 
(v) 
(a)
(b)
 where the amount is remitted 
for 
the 
purpose 
other 
than 
mentioned in (iv) above; and
 the amount or aggregate of the 
amounts in excess of ` 7 lakhs is 
remitted by the buyer in a 
financial year
5% of the 
amt 
or 
agg. 
of 
amts 
in 
excess 
of 
` 7 lakh 
Nil 
at source) 
(No tax to be collected 
20% of the 
amt 
or 
agg. 
of 
amts 
in 
excess 
of 
` 7 lakh 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
7.87 
(vi) 
(a)  where 
the 
amount 
being
remitted out is a loan obtained
from any financial institution
as defined in section 80E, for
the purpose of pursuing any
education; and
(b)
the amount or aggregate of
the amounts in excess of ` 7
lakhs is remitted by the buyer
in a financial year
0.5% of the amt or agg. 
of amts in excess of ` 7 
lakh 
Cases where no tax is to be collected 
(i) 
No TCS by the authorized dealer on an amount in respect of 
which the sum has been collected by the seller 
(ii) 
No TCS, if the buyer is liable to deduct tax at source under any 
other provision of the Act and has deducted such tax 
(iii) No TCS, if the buyer is the Central Government, a State 
Government, an embassy, a High Commission, a legation, a 
commission, a consulate, the trade representation of a foreign 
State, a local authority9 or any other person notified by the 
Central Government, subject to fulfillment of conditions 
stipulated thereunder. 
Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide notification no. 99/2022 dated 
17.8.2022, notified that the provisions of section 206C(1G) 
would not apply to a person (being a buyer) who is a non-
resident in India in terms of section 6 and does not have a 
permanent establishment in India. 
(v)
Sale of goods of value exceeding ` 50 lakh
(a)
As per section 206C(1H), tax is also required to be collected by a
seller, who receives any amount as consideration for sale of
goods of the value or aggregate of such value exceeding
` 50 lakhs in a previous year [other than exported goods or
goods covered under sub-sections (1)/(1F)/(1G)].
9 as defined in Explanation to section 10(20) 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.88 
(b)
Tax is to be collected at source @0.1% u/s 206C(1H) of the sale
consideration exceeding ` 50 lakhs, at the time of receipt of
consideration.
(c)
Tax is, however, not required to be collected if the buyer is liable
to deduct tax at source under any other provision of the Act on
the goods purchased by him from the seller and has deducted
such tax.
(vi)
Power of the CBDT to issue guidelines
In case of any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of
section 206C(1G)/(1H), the CBDT is empowered to issue guidelines,
with the approval of the Central Government, for the purpose of
removing the difficulty.
Every guideline issued by the CBDT shall be laid before each House of
Parliament, and shall be binding on the income-tax authorities and on
the person liable to collect tax.
(2)
Meaning of certain terms
Term 
Meaning 
(i) 
Overseas 
tour 
program 
package 
For section 206C(1G) 
Any tour package which offers visit to a country/(ies) 
or territory/(ies) outside India. It includes expenses for 
travel or hotel stay or boarding or lodging or any 
other expenditure of similar nature or in relation 
thereto. [Clause (ii) of Explanation to section 206C(1G)] 
(ii) 
Buyer 
For section 206C(1H): 
A person who purchases any goods but does not 
include – 
(A)
the Central Government, a State Government, an
embassy, 
a 
High 
Commission, 
legation,
commission, 
consulate 
and 
the 
trade
representation of a foreign State, or
(B)
a local authority7; or
(C)
a person importing goods into India or any other
person as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify for
this purpose, subject to stipulated conditions.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
7.89 
For section 206C(1): 
A person who obtains in any sale, by way of auction, 
tender, or any other mode, goods of the nature 
specified in the Table in point (1) or the right to 
receive any such goods but does not include – 
(A)
a 
public 
sector 
company, 
the 
Central
Government, a State Government, and an
embassy, 
a 
high 
commission, 
legation,
commission, 
consulate 
and 
the 
trade
representation, of a foreign State and a club, or
(B)
a buyer in the retail sale of such goods
purchased by him for personal consumption
[Explanation to section 206C]
For section 206C(1F): 
A person who obtains in any sale, goods of the nature 
specified therein, but does not include – 
(A)
the Central Government, a State Government
and an embassy, a High Commission, legation,
commission, 
consulate 
and 
the 
trade
representation of a foreign State; or
(B)
a local authority; or
(C)
a public sector company which is engaged in the
business of carrying passengers. [Explanation to
section 206C]
(iii) Seller 
For section 206C(1H): 
A person whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover 
from the business carried on by him exceed ` 10 
crores during the financial year immediately preceding 
the financial year in which sale of goods is carried out. 
However, seller does not include a person as notified 
by the Central Government for this purpose, subject to 
fulfillment of the stipulated conditions [Clause (b) of 
Explanation to section 206C(1H)] 
For section 206C(1) and section 206C(1F): 
(i)
The Central Government,
(ii)
a State Government or
(iii)
any local authority or
(iv)
corporation or
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.90 
(v)
authority established by or under a Central, State
or Provincial Act, or
(vi)
any company or
(vii)
firm or
(viii) co-operative society
Seller also includes an individual or a HUF whose total 
sales, gross receipts or turnover from the business or 
profession carried on by him exceed ` 1 crore in case 
of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession during 
the financial year immediately preceding the financial 
year in which the goods of the nature specified in the 
Table in point (1) are sold. 
[Explanation to section 206C]
(iv) Scrap 
Waste and scrap from the manufacture or mechanical 
working of materials which is definitely not usable as 
such because of breakage, cutting up, wear and other 
reasons. [Explanation to section 206C]
(3)
Higher rate of TCS for non-furnishers of PAN [Section 206CC]
(i)
The provisions of section 206CC require tax collection at the higher of 
the following two rates, in case of failure by the person paying any 
sum or amount on which tax is collectible at source (collectee) to 
furnish PAN [PAN or Aadhaar number in case of section 206C(1H)] to 
the person responsible for collecting tax at source (collector) –
(a)
at twice the rate specified in the relevant provision of the Act
(b)
at 5% [1%, in case tax is required to be collected at source u/s 
206C(1H)] 
However, the maximum the rate of TCS under this section shall not
exceed 20%. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
7.91 
(ii)
Tax would be collectible at the rates mentioned above also in case
where the person furnishes a declaration under section 206C(1A) but
does not provide his PAN.
(iii)
Both the collectee and the collector have to compulsorily quote the
PAN of the collectee in all correspondence, bills, vouchers and other
documents exchanged between them.
(iv)
If the PAN provided to the collector is invalid or it does not belong to
the collectee, it shall be deemed that the collectee has not furnished
his PAN to the collector. Accordingly, tax would be collectible at the
rate specified in (i) above.
(v)
The provisions of section 206CC do not apply to a non-resident who
does not have a permanent establishment in India.
(4)
Higher rate of TCS for non-filers of income-tax return [Section 206CCA]
(i)
Section 206CCA requires tax to be collected at source under the
provisions of this Chapter on any sum or amount received by a person
from a specified person, at higher of the following rates –
(a)
at twice the rate specified in the relevant provision of the Act;
(b)
at 5%
However, the maximum the rate of TCS under this section shall not 
exceed 20%.  
(ii)
In case the provisions of section 206CC are also applicable to the
specified person, in addition to the provisions of section 206CCA,
then, tax is required to be collected at higher of the two rates
provided in section 206CC and section 206CCA.
(iii)
Meaning of “specified person” – A person who has not furnished the
return of income for assessment year relevant to the previous year
immediately preceding the financial year in which tax is required to be
collected, for which the time limit for furnishing the return of income
under section 139(1) has expired, and the aggregate of tax deducted
at source and tax collected at source in his case is ` 50,000 or more in
the said previous year.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.92 
However, the specified person would not include - 
- 
a non-resident who does not have a permanent establishment in 
India10; or 
-
a person who is not required to furnish the return of income for
the assessment year relevant to the said previous year and is
notified by the Central Government in this behalf.
(5)
CBDT Clarification relating to certain issues with respect to
section 206C(1F)
These amendments in section 206C have given rise to certain issues relating
to the scope and applicability of the provisions. Accordingly, the CBDT has,
vide Circular No. 22/2016 dated 8.6.2016, clarified the following issues in
“Question & Answer (Q&A)” format.
Q.1 Whether TCS@1% is on sale of motor vehicle at retail level or also on
sale of motor vehicles by manufacturers to dealers/ distributors? 
A.
To bring high value transactions within the tax net, section 206C has
been amended to provide that the seller shall collect the tax @ 1%
from the purchaser on sale of motor vehicle of the value exceeding
` 10 lakhs. This is brought to cover all transactions of retail sales and
accordingly, it will not apply on sale of motor vehicles by
manufacturers to dealers/distributors.
Q.2 Whether TCS@1% on sale of motor vehicle is applicable only to
luxury cars? 
A.
No, as per section 206C(1F), the seller shall collect tax@1% from the
purchaser on sale of any motor vehicle of the value exceeding ` 10 lakhs.
Q.3 Whether TCS@1% is applicable in the case of sale to Government
Departments, 
Embassies, 
Consulates 
and 
United 
Nation 
Institutions, of motor vehicle or any other goods or provision of 
services? 
A.
Government, institutions notified under United Nations (Privileges and
Immunities) Act 1947, and Embassies, Consulates, High Commission,
10“Permanent establishment” includes a fixed place of business through which the business of the 
enterprise is wholly or partly carried on.  This concept and related provisions will be dealt with at the Final 
level. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
7.93 
Legation, Commission and trade representation of a foreign State shall 
not be liable to levy of TCS@1% under section 206C(1F). 
Q.4 Whether TCS is applicable on each sale of motor vehicle or on
aggregate value of sale during the year? 
A.
Tax is to be collected at source@1% on sale consideration of a motor
vehicle exceeding ` 10 lakhs. It is applicable to each sale and not to
aggregate value of sale made during the year.
Q.5 Whether TCS@1% on sale of motor vehicle is applicable in case of
an individual? 
A.
The definition of "Seller" as given in clause (c) of the Explanation
below sub-section (11) of section 206C shall be applicable in the case
of sale of motor vehicles also.
Q.6 How would the provisions of TCS on sale of motor vehicle be
applicable in a case where part of the payment is made in cash 
and part is made by cheque? 
A.
The provisions of TCS on sale of motor vehicle exceeding ` 10 lakhs is
not dependent on mode of payment. Any sale of motor vehicle
exceeding ` 10 lakhs would attract TCS@1%.
(6)
CBDT Clarification relating to certain issues with respect to
section 206C(1H)
In exercise of the power to issue guidelines, the CBDT has, with the approval
of Central Government, vide Circular no. 17/2020 dated 29.9.2020, issued
the following guidelines for removing certain difficulties-
1.
Applicability on sale of Motor vehicle:
The provisions of section 206C(1F) apply to sale of motor vehicle of
the value exceeding ` 10 lakhs. Section 206C(1H) excludes from its
applicability goods covered under section 206C(1F). It may be noted
that the scope of sections 206C(1H) and (1F) are different. While
section 206C(1F) is based on single sale of motor vehicle, section
206C(1H) is for receipt above ` 50 lakhs. Hence, in order to remove
difficulty that whether all motor vehicles are excluded from the
applicability of section 206C(1H), it is clarified that,-
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.94 
-
Receipt of sale consideration from a dealer would be subjected
to TCS under section 206C(1H), if such sales are not subjected to
TCS under section 206C(1F)
-
In case of sale to consumer, receipt of sale consideration for sale
of motor vehicle of the value of ` 10 lakhs or less to a buyer
would be subjected to TCS under section 206C(1H), if the receipt
of sale consideration for such vehicles during the previous year
exceeds `  50 lakhs during the previous year.
-
In case of sale to consumer, receipt of sale consideration for sale
of motor vehicle of the value exceeding ` 10 lakhs would not be
subjected to TCS under section 206C(1H) if such sales are
subjected to TCS under section 206C(1F).
2.
Adjustment for sale return, discount or indirect taxes:
It is been clarified that no adjustment on account of sale return or
discount or indirect taxes including GST is required to be made for
collection of tax under section 206C(1H) since the collection is made
with reference to receipt of amount of sale consideration.
Note – It can be inferred that no adjustment for GST is required to be
made under section 206C(1F) also, since collection is made with
reference to receipt of amount of sale consideration.
ILLUSTRATION 13 
Mr. Gupta, a resident Indian, is in retail business and his turnover for F.Y.2022-23 
was ` 12 crores. He regularly purchases goods from another resident, Mr. Agarwal, 
a wholesaler, and the aggregate payments during the F.Y.2023-24 was ` 95 lakh 
(` 20 lakh on 1.6.2023, ` 25 lakh on 12.8.2023, ` 22 lakh on 23.11.2023 and ` 28 
lakh on 25.3.2024). Assume that the said amounts were credited to Mr. Agarwal’s 
account in the books of Mr. Gupta on the same date. Mr. Agarwal’s turnover for 
F.Y.2022-23 was ` 15 crores.   
(1)
Based on the above facts, examine the TDS/TCS implications, if any, under the
Income-tax Act, 1961.
(2)
Would your answer be different if Mr. Gupta’s turnover for F.Y.2022-23 was
` 8 crores, all other facts remaining the same?
(3)
Would your answer to (1) and (2) change, if PAN has not been furnished by
the buyer or seller, as required?
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
7.95 
SOLUTION 
(1)
Since Mr. Gupta’s turnover for F.Y.2022-23 exceeds 10 crores, and payments
made by him to Mr. Agarwal, a resident seller exceed ` 50 lakhs in the
P.Y.2023-24, he is liable to deduct tax@0.1% of ` 45 lakhs (being the sum
exceeding ` 50 lakhs) in the following manner –
No tax is to be deducted u/s 194Q on the payments made on 1.6.2023 and
12.8.2023, since the aggregate payments till that date i.e. 45 lakhs, has not
exceeded the threshold of ` 50 lakhs.
Tax of ` 1,700 (i.e., 0.1% of ` 17 lakhs) has to be deducted u/s 194Q from
the payment/ credit of ` 22 lakh on 23.11.2023 [` 22 lakh – ` 5 lakhs, being
the balance unexhausted threshold limit].
Tax of ` 2,800 (i.e., 0.1% of ` 28 lakhs) has to be deducted u/s 194Q from
the payment/ credit of ` 28 lakhs on 25.3.2024.
Note – In this case, since both section 194Q and 206C(1H) applies, tax has to
be deducted u/s 194Q.
(2)
If Mr. Gupta’s turnover for the F.Y.2022-23 was only ` 8 crores, TDS
provisions under section 194Q would not be attracted. However, TCS
provisions under section 206C(1H) would be attracted in the hands of
Mr. Agarwal, since his turnover exceeds ` 10 crores in the F.Y.2022-23 and
his receipts from Mr. Gupta exceed ` 50 lakhs.
No tax is to be collected u/s 206C(1H) on 1.6.2023 and 12.8.2023, since the
aggregate receipts till that date i.e. 45 lakhs, has not exceeded the threshold
of ` 50 lakhs.
Tax of ` 1,700 (i.e., 0.1% of ` 17 lakhs) has to be collected u/s 206C(1H) on
23.11.2023 (` 22 lakh – ` 5 lakhs, being the balance unexhausted threshold limit).
Tax of ` 2,800 (i.e., 0.1% of ` 28 lakhs) has to be collected u/s 206C(1H) on
25.3.2024.
(3)
In case (1), if PAN is not furnished by Mr. Agarwal to Mr. Gupta, then,
Mr. Gupta has to deduct tax@5%, instead of 0.1%. Accordingly, tax of
` 85,000 (i.e., 5% of ` 17 lakhs) and ` 1,40,000 (5% of ` 28 lakhs) has to be
deducted by Mr. Gupta u/s 194Q on 23.11.2023 and 25.3.2024, respectively.
In case (2), if PAN is not furnished by Mr. Gupta to Mr. Agarwal, then,
Mr. Agarwal has to collect tax@1% instead of 0.1%. Accordingly, tax of
` 17,000 (i.e., 1% of ` 17 lakhs) and ` 28,000 (1% of ` 28 lakhs) has to be
collected by Mr. Agarwal u/s 206C(1H) on 23.11.2023 and 25.3.2024,
respectively.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Overview - TCS u/s 206C(1)/(1F)/(1H) v. TDS u/s 194Q 
Particulars 
206C(1) 
206C(1F) 
206C(1H) 
194Q 
TCS 
TCS 
TCS 
TDS 
1. 
Point of time 
At the time of debit 
or at the time of 
receipt, whichever is 
earlier 
At the time of receipt 
At the time of receipt 
At 
the 
time 
of 
payment or credit, 
whichever is earlier 
2. 
% of TDS/TCS, as 
the case may be 
Different rates for 
different goods (See 
below) 
1% of sale consideration 
0.1% 
of 
the 
sale 
consideration exceeding 
` 50 lakhs from a buyer 
0.1% of the value of 
purchases 
exceeding 
` 
50 
lakhs from a seller 
3. 
Seller 
[206C(1)/(1F)/(1H)] 
Buyer (194Q) 
Central Govt., State Govt., Local Authority, 
Company, Co-op society, firm, corporation, 
Individual/HUF whose turnover in F.Y.2022-23 
> ` 1 crore (business)/ ` 50 lakh (profession)
Seller’s turnover should 
exceed ` 10 crore in the 
F.Y.2022-23 
Buyer’s 
turnover 
should exceed ` 10 
crore 
in 
the 
F.Y.2022-23 
4. 
Exclusions 
from 
the definition of 
buyer 
Common 
Exclusions 
from 
206C(1)/(1F)/(1H) 
Central Govt, State Govt, embassy, High commission, legation, consulate, 
commission, trade rep. of a foreign state 
Specific exclusions 
Public sector Co., a 
club and 
Buyer in retail sale of 
goods purchased for 
personal 
consumption 
Local authority, 
Public 
sector 
co. 
engaged in the business 
of carrying passengers 
Local authority, 
Persons 
importing 
goods 
into 
India 
or 
other notified persons 
INCOME TAX LAW 
7.96
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Goods 
206C(1) 
206C(1F) 
194Q 
206C(1H) 
TCS 
TCS 
TDS 
TCS 
1 
Alcoholic liquor for human 
consumption 
1% 
2 
Tendu leaves 
5% 
3 
Timber obtained under forest 
lease 
2.5% 
4 
Timber obtained by any other 
mode 
2.5% 
5 
Any other forest produce not 
being timber or tendu leaves 
2.5% 
6 
Scrap 
1% 
7 
Minerals, being coal or lignite 
or iron ore 
1% 
If items (1) to (7) are used for 
manufacturing, processing or 
producing articles or things or 
generation of electricity and 
not for trading purposes 
Nil, by virtue 
of section 
206C(1A) 
N.A. 
Yes, if turnover of buyer 
exceeds ` 10 crore in the 
F.Y.2022-23 and value of 
purchases from seller in 
F.Y.2023-24 exceeds ` 50 
lakhs 
Nil 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
a
a
7. 97 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Goods 
206C(1) 
206C(1F) 
194Q 
206C(1H) 
TCS 
TCS 
TDS 
TCS 
8 
Sale of Motor Vehicle of value 
exceeding ` 10 lakhs 
- 
1% of sale 
consideration 
- 
- 
9 
Sale of Motor Vehicle of value 
exceeding ` 10 lakhs by 
manufacturer 
to 
dealers/ 
distributers 
- 
- 
Yes, if turnover of dealer 
exceeds ` 10 crore in the 
F.Y.2022-23 and value of 
motor vehicles purchased 
from manufacturer in the 
F.Y.2023-24 exceeds ` 50 
lakhs. 
No, if dealer is required 
to deduct tax at source. 
Yes, if dealer is not 
required to deduct tax 
at 
source 
and 
manufacturer’s 
turnover exceeds ` 10 
crore in the F.Y.2022-23 
and value of motor 
vehicles sold to dealer 
in F.Y.2023-24 exceeds 
` 50 lakhs 
10 
Sale of Motor Vehicle of value 
not exceeding ` 10 lakhs and 
aggregate value of all motor 
vehicles sold by the seller to 
the buyer ≤ ` 50 lakhs in the 
F.Y.2023-24 
- 
- 
-
- 
INCOME TAX LAW 
7.98
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Goods 
206C(1) 
206C(1F) 
194Q 
206C(1H) 
TCS 
TCS 
TDS 
TCS 
11 
Sale of Motor Vehicle of value 
not exceeding ` 10 lakhs but 
aggregate value of all motor 
vehicles sold by the seller to 
the buyer > ` 50 lakhs in the 
F.Y.2023-24 
- 
- 
Yes, if turnover of buyer 
exceeds ` 10 crore in the 
F.Y.2022-23. 
No, if buyer is required 
to deduct tax at source. 
Yes, if buyer is not 
required to deduct TDS 
and seller’s turnover 
exceeds ` 10 crore in 
the F.Y.2022-23 
12 
Sale of goods other than 
mentioned in 1 to 11 
If aggregate value of goods 
sold by seller to buyer is ` 50 
lakhs or less 
- 
- 
- 
- 
If aggregate value of goods 
sold by the seller to buyer is 
more than ` 50 lakhs 
- 
- 
Yes, if turnover of buyer 
exceeds ` 10 crore in the 
F.Y.2022-23. 
No, if buyer is required 
to deduct tax at source. 
Yes, if buyer is not 
required to deduct TDS 
and seller’s turnover 
exceeds 
` 10 crore in the 
F.Y.2022-23 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
a
a
7. 99
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

(7)
Furnishing
of 
copy 
of 
declaration 
within 
specified 
time
[Section 206C(1B)]
The person responsible for collecting tax under this section shall deliver or
cause to be delivered to the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner one copy of the
declaration referred to in sub-section (1A) on or before 7th of the month
next following the month in which the declaration is furnished to him.
(8)
TCS to be paid within prescribed time [Section 206C(3)]
Any amount collected under this section shall be paid within the prescribed
time to the credit of the Central Government or as the Board directs.
Time limit for paying tax collected to the credit of the Central
Government [Rule 37CA]
Person 
collecting sums 
in accordance 
with section 
206C 
Circumstance 
Period within which 
such sum should be 
paid to the credit of 
the Central 
Government 
(1) An office of the 
Government 
(i) 
where the tax is 
paid 
without 
production of an 
income-tax 
challan 
on the same day 
(ii) where tax is paid 
accompanied by 
an 
income-tax 
challan 
on or before 7 days 
from the end of the 
month 
in 
which 
the 
collection is made 
(2) Collectors other 
than an office of 
the Government 
within one week from 
the last day of the 
month 
in 
which 
the 
collection is made 
INCOME TAX LAW 
7.100
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
7.101 
(9)
Main differences between TDS and TCS
TDS 
TCS 
(1) TDS is tax deduction at 
source 
TCS is tax collection at source. 
(2) Person 
responsible 
for 
paying is required to deduct 
tax 
at 
source 
at 
the 
prescribed rate. 
(i) Seller 
of 
certain 
goods 
is
responsible for collecting tax at
source at the prescribed rate
from the buyer.
(ii)  Person who grants licence or
lease (in respect of any parking
lot, toll plaza, mine or quarry)
is responsible for collecting tax
at source at the prescribed rate
from the licensee or lessee, as
the case may be.
(iii) Authorised 
dealer 
receiving
amount for remittance under
the LRS of the RBI or seller of
an 
overseas 
tour 
program
package 
is 
responsible 
for
collecting tax at source at the
prescribed 
rate 
from 
the
buyer.
(3) Generally, tax is required to 
be deducted at the time of 
credit to the account of the 
payee or at the time of 
payment, 
whichever 
is 
earlier. 
However, in case of payment 
of salary, payment in respect 
of life insurance policy etc. 
tax 
is 
required 
to 
be 
deducted at the time of 
payment. 
Generally, tax is required to be 
collected at source at the time of 
debiting of the amount payable by 
the buyer of certain goods to the 
account of the buyer or at the 
time of receipt of such amount 
from the said buyer, whichever is 
earlier. 
However, in case of sale of motor 
vehicle of the value exceeding 
` 10 lakhs and sale of goods 
exceeding ` 50 lakhs other than 
exported 
goods 
and 
goods 
mentioned in section 206C(1), tax 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.102 
collection at source u/s 206C(1F) 
and 
206C(1H), 
respectively, 
is 
required at the time of receipt of 
sale consideration. 
Note – TCS will be dealt with in detail at the Final level. 
(10) Common number for TDS and TCS [Section 203A]
(i)
Persons responsible for deducting tax or collecting tax at source
should apply to the Assessing Officer for the allotment of a “tax-
deduction and collection-account number”.
(ii)
Section 203A(2) enlists the documents/certificates/returns/challans in
which the “tax deduction account number” or “tax collection account
number” or “tax deduction and collection account number” has to be
compulsorily quoted.
(iii)
The requirement of obtaining and quoting of TAN under section 203A
shall not apply to such person, as may be notified by the Central
Government in this behalf.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold Limit 
for deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of TDS 
Time of deduction 
192 
Salary 
Basic 
exemption 
limit 
This is taken care 
of in computation 
of the average rate 
of income-tax. 
Any 
person 
responsible 
for 
paying any income 
chargeable under the 
head “Salaries 
Individual 
(Employee) 
Average 
rate 
of income-tax 
At the time of payment 
192A Premature 
withdrawal 
from 
Employees’ 
Provident Fund 
Payment 
or 
aggregate payment 
≥ ` 50,000 
Trustees of the EPF 
Scheme 
or 
any 
authorised 
person 
under the Scheme 
Individual 
(Employee) 
10% 
on 
premature 
taxable 
withdrawal 
At the time of payment 
193 
Interest 
on 
Securities 
> ` 10,000 in a F.Y., 
in case of interest 
on 
8% 
Savings 
(Taxable) 
Bonds, 
2003/7.75%
Savings 
(Taxable)
Bonds, 2018.
Any 
person 
responsible 
for 
paying any income by 
way of interest on 
securities 
 Any resident 
10% 
At the time of credit of 
such income to the 
account of the payee 
or 
at 
the 
time 
of 
payment, whichever is 
earlier. 
LET US RECAPITULATE 
I.
Tax deduction at source
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
a
a
7.1 03
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold Limit 
for deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of TDS 
Time of deduction 
> ` 5,000 in a F.Y.,
in case of interest
on 
debentures
issued by a Co. in
which the public
are 
substantially
interested, paid or
credited 
to 
a
resident individual
or HUF by an A/c
payee cheque
>
No 
threshold
specified 
in 
any
other case.
194 
Dividend 
(including 
dividends on 
preference 
shares) 
Amount or aggregate 
amount > ` 5,000 in a 
F.Y., 
in 
case 
of 
dividend 
paid 
or 
credited 
to 
an 
individual shareholder 
by any mode other 
than cash 
> No threshold in
other cases
The Principal Officer 
of 
a 
domestic 
company 
Resident 
shareholder 
10% 
Before 
making 
any 
payment by any mode 
in 
respect 
of 
any 
dividend 
or 
before 
making 
any 
distribution 
or 
payment of dividend. 
INCOME TAX LAW 
7.1 04 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold Limit 
for deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of TDS 
Time of deduction 
194A Interest other 
than interest 
on securities 
Amount 
or 
aggregate amount 
> ` 40,000 in a F.Y., 
in case of interest 
credited or paid by 
–
(i)
a
banking 
company;
(ii) a co-operative 
society engaged in 
banking 
business; 
and
(iii) a post office on
any deposit under
a notified Scheme.
In all the above
cases, if payee is a
resident 
senior
citizen, 
tax
deduction limit is >
` 50,000.
> ` 5,000 in a F.Y.,
in other cases.
Any 
person 
(other 
than an individual or 
HUF 
whose 
total 
sales, gross receipts 
or 
turnover 
from 
business 
or 
profession 
do 
not 
exceed ` 1 crore in 
case of business or 
` 50 lakhs in case of 
profession during the 
immediately 
preceding 
F.Y.)
responsible 
for
paying interest other 
than 
interest 
on 
securities. 
Any Resident 
10% 
At the time of credit of 
such income to the 
account of the payee 
or 
at 
the 
time 
of 
payment, whichever is 
earlier. 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
a
a
7.1 05
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold Limit 
for deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of TDS 
Time of deduction 
194B Winnings 
from 
any 
lottery, 
crossword 
puzzle 
or 
card game or 
other 
game 
of any sort or 
from 
gambling or 
betting 
of 
any form or 
nature 
Amount 
or 
the 
aggregate 
of 
amounts 
>  
` 10,000 in a F.Y. 
The 
person 
responsible 
for 
paying 
income 
by 
way of such winnings 
Any Person 
30% 
At the time of payment 
194BA Winnings 
from 
online 
games 
On 
the 
net 
winnings 
in 
a 
person’s 
user 
account 
as 
computed 
in 
prescribed manner. 
Any 
person 
responsible 
for 
paying 
income 
by 
way of such winnings 
from 
any 
online 
game. 
Any person 
30% 
At the end of the F.Y. 
In 
case 
there 
is 
withdrawal from user 
account during the F.Y., 
tax would be deducted 
at the time of such 
withdrawal 
on 
net 
winnings comprised in 
such 
withdrawal. 
In 
addition, 
tax 
would 
also be deducted on 
INCOME TAX LAW 
7.1 06 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold Limit 
for deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of TDS 
Time of deduction 
the remaining amount 
of net winnings in the 
user 
account 
as 
computed 
in 
prescribed manner  at 
the end of the F.Y. 
194BB Winnings 
from 
horse 
race 
Amount 
or 
the  
aggregate 
of 
amounts 
>  
` 10,000 in a F.Y. 
Book 
Maker 
or 
a 
person 
holding 
licence 
for 
horse 
racing 
or 
for 
arranging 
for 
wagering or betting 
in any race course. 
Any Person 
30% 
At the time of payment 
194C Payments to 
Contractors 
Single 
sum 
credited or paid > 
` 30,000 
(or) 
The aggregate of 
sums credited or 
paid 
to 
a 
contractor 
during 
the 
F.Y. 
>  
` 1,00,000 
Central/State 
Govt., 
Local 
authority, 
Central/State/ 
Provincial 
Corpn., 
company, firm, trust, 
registered 
society, 
co-operative society, 
university established 
under Central/State/ 
Provincial 
Act, 
declared 
university 
Any Resident 
contractor for 
carrying 
out 
any 
work 
(including 
supply 
of 
labour) 
1% 
of 
sum 
paid 
or 
credited, if the 
payee 
is an 
Individual 
or 
HUF 
2% 
of 
sum 
paid 
or 
credited, if the 
payee is any 
other person. 
At the time of credit of 
such 
sum 
to 
the 
account 
of 
the 
contractor or at the 
time 
of 
payment, 
whichever is earlier. 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
a
a
7.1 07
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold Limit 
for deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of TDS 
Time of deduction 
Individual/HUF 
need not deduct 
tax where sum is 
credited 
or 
paid 
exclusively 
for 
personal purposes 
under the UGC Act, 
Govt. of Foreign State 
or 
a 
foreign 
enterprise, 
individual/HUF whose 
total 
sales, 
gross 
receipts or turnover 
from 
business 
or 
profession 
exceeds 
` 1 crore in case of 
business or ` 50 lakhs 
in case of profession 
during 
the 
immediately 
preceding F.Y. 
194D Insurance 
Commission 
Amount 
or 
aggregate amount 
> ` 15,000 in a F.Y.
Any 
person 
responsible 
for 
paying any income by 
way of remuneration 
or 
reward 
for 
soliciting 
or 
procuring 
insurance 
business 
Any Resident 5%, 
if 
the 
payee 
is 
a 
non-corporate 
resident 
10%, 
if 
the 
payee 
is 
a 
domestic 
company 
At the time of credit of 
such income to the 
account of the payee 
or 
at 
the 
time 
of 
payment, whichever is 
earlier. 
INCOME TAX LAW 
7.1 08
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature 
of 
payment 
Threshold 
Limit 
for deduction 
of tax at 
source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of 
TDS 
Time of 
deduction 
194DA Any 
sum 
under a 
Life 
Insurance 
Policy 
not 
fulfilling 
the 
conditions 
specified u/s 
10(10D) 
 Amou
nt 
or 
aggregate 
amount 
≥ ` 1,00,000 in a 
financial year 
Any 
person 
responsible 
for 
paying 
any 
sum 
under a LIP, 
including 
the sum allocated 
by 
way of 
bonus 
Any 
resident 
5% of 
the 
amount of 
income 
comprised 
At the time of 
payment 
194G Commission 
on 
sale 
of 
lottery tickets 
>
` 15,000 in a
financial year
 A
ny 
person 
responsible 
for 
paying any income 
by 
way of 
commission, 
remuneration or 
prize 
(by whatever 
name 
called) 
on 
lottery 
tickets 
Any 
person 
stocking, 
distributing, 
purchasing 
or 
selling lottery 
tickets 
5% 
At the time of credit 
of 
such income to 
the 
account of the 
payee 
or 
at 
the 
time 
of 
payment, whichever 
is 
earlier. 
194H Commission 
or brokerage 
>
` 15,000 in a
financial year 
 Any 
person 
(other 
than an Individual 
or 
HUF 
whose 
total 
sales, gross 
receipts 
or 
turnover 
from 
business 
or 
profession 
do 
not 
exceed ` 1 crore 
in 
Any 
resident 
5% 
At the time of credit 
of 
such income to 
the 
account of the 
payee 
or 
at 
the 
time 
of 
payment, whichever 
is 
earlier. 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
a
a
7.1 09
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature 
of 
payment 
Threshold Limit 
for deduction 
of tax at 
source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of 
TDS 
Time of 
deduction 
case of business 
or 
` 50 lakhs in case 
of 
profession during the 
immediately 
preceding 
responsible 
F.Y.)
for
paying 
commission 
or brokerage. 
194-I
Rent 
> ` 2,40,000 in a
financial year
 Any 
person 
(other 
than an individual 
or 
HUF 
whose 
total 
sales, gross receipts 
or 
turnover 
from 
business 
or 
profession carried on 
by him do not 
exceed   
` 1 crore in case 
of 
business 
or 
` 50 lakhs in case 
of 
profession during the 
immediately 
preceding 
responsible 
F.Y.)
for
paying rent. 
Any resident 
For P & M 
or 
equipment- 
2% 
For 
land 
or 
building, land 
appurtenant 
to a 
building, 
furniture 
or 
fittings -10% 
At the time of credit 
of 
such income to 
the 
account of the 
payee 
or 
at 
the 
time 
of 
payment, whichever 
is 
earlier. 
INCOME TAX LAW 
7.1 10 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold Limit 
for deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of TDS 
Time of deduction 
194-IA Payment 
on 
transfer 
of 
certain 
immovable 
property 
other 
than 
agricultural 
land 
≥ 
` 
50 
lakh 
(Consideration for 
transfer or stamp 
duty value) 
Any person, being a 
transferee (other than 
a person referred to 
in 
section 
194LA 
responsible 
for 
paying compensation 
for 
compulsory 
acquisition 
of 
immovable property 
other 
than 
rural 
agricultural land) 
Resident 
transferor 
1% 
of 
consideration 
for transfer or 
stamp 
duty 
value, 
whichever 
is 
higher 
At the time of credit of 
such 
sum 
to 
the 
account 
of 
the 
transferor or at the 
time 
of 
payment, 
whichever is earlier. 
194-IB Payment 
of 
rent 
by 
certain 
individuals or 
HUF 
> ` 50,000 for a 
month or part of a 
month
Individual/ 
HUF 
(other 
than 
Individual/HUF whose 
total 
sales, 
gross 
receipts or turnover 
from 
business 
or 
profession carried on 
by him exceeds ` 1 
crore 
in 
case 
of 
business 
or 
` 50 lakhs in case of 
profession during the 
immediately 
Any Resident 
5% 
At the time of credit of 
rent, for the last month 
of the previous year or 
the 
last 
month 
of 
tenancy, if the property 
is vacated during the 
year, as the case may 
be, to the account of 
the payee or at the 
time 
of 
payment, 
whichever is earlier 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
a
a
7.1 11 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold Limit 
for deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of TDS 
Time of deduction 
preceding 
F.Y.)
responsible 
for
paying rent. 
194J 
Fees 
for 
professional 
or 
technical 
services/ 
Royalty/ 
Non-
compete 
fees/ 
Director’s 
remuneration 
>
` 30,000 in a 
financial year, for 
each category of 
income. (However, 
this limit does not 
apply in case of 
payment made to 
director 
of 
a 
company). 
Any 
person, 
other 
than an individual or 
HUF; 
However, in case of 
fees for professional 
or technical services 
paid 
or 
credited, 
individual/HUF, 
whose 
total 
sales, 
gross 
receipts 
or 
turnover 
from 
business 
or 
profession exceeds ` 
1 crore in case of 
business or ` 50 lakhs 
in case of profession 
during 
the 
immediately 
preceding 
F.Y.,
is 
liable to deduct tax 
u/s 
194J, 
except 
Any Resident 2% 
- 
Payee 
engaged only 
in 
the 
business 
of 
operation 
of 
call centre 
2% - In case 
of 
fees 
for 
technical 
services 
or 
royalty, where 
such royalty is 
in the nature 
of 
consider-
ation for sale, 
distribution or 
exhibition 
of 
cinemato-
graphic films 
10% - Other 
payments 
At the time of credit of 
such 
sum 
to 
the 
account of the payee 
or 
at 
the 
time 
of 
payment, whichever is 
earlier. 
INCOME TAX LAW 
7.1 12 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold Limit 
for deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of TDS 
Time of deduction 
where 
fees 
for 
professional services 
is credited or paid 
exclusively 
for 
his 
personal purposes. 
194K Income 
on 
units 
other 
than in the 
nature 
of 
capital gains 
Amount 
or 
aggregate amount 
> ` 5,000 in a F.Y.
Any 
person 
responsible 
for 
paying any income in 
respect of units of a 
mutual 
fund/Administrator of 
the 
specified 
undertaking/ 
specified company 
Any resident 
10% 
At the time of credit of 
such 
sum 
to 
the 
account of the payee 
or 
at 
the 
time 
of 
payment, whichever is 
earlier. 
194LA Compensatio
n 
on 
acquisition of 
certain 
immovable 
property 
other 
than 
agricultural 
land situated 
in India 
Amount 
or 
aggregate amount 
> ` 2,50,000 in a 
F.Y.
Any 
person 
responsible 
for 
paying any sum in 
the 
nature 
of 
compensation 
or 
enhanced 
compensation 
on 
compulsory 
acquisition 
of 
immovable property 
Any Resident 
10% 
At the time of payment 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
a
a
7.1 13
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold Limit 
for deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of TDS 
Time of deduction 
194M -
Payments
to
Contractors
- Commission
or brokerage
-
Fees 
for
professional
services
> ` 50,00,000 in a 
financial year
Individual 
or 
HUF 
other than those who 
are 
required 
to 
deduct tax at source 
under section 194C 
or 194H or 194J 
Any Resident 
5% 
At the time of credit of 
such sum or at the 
time 
of 
payment, 
whichever is earlier. 
194N Cash 
withdrawals 
> ` 3 crore if the
recipient is a co-
operative society
> ` 1 crore in case
of others
- a banking company 
or   any bank or
banking institution
-
a 
co-operative
society engaged in
carrying 
on 
the
business of banking
or
- a post office
who is responsible for 
paying 
any 
sum, 
being the amount or 
the 
aggregate 
of 
amounts, as the case 
may 
be, 
in 
cash 
Any person 
@2% of such 
sum 
In 
case 
the 
recipient 
has 
not filed ROI 
for all the 3 
immediately 
preceding 
P.Y.s, 
for 
which 
time 
limit 
u/s 
139(1) 
has 
expired, such 
sum shall be 
the 
amt 
or 
agg. of amts, 
At the time of payment 
of such sum 
INCOME TAX LAW 
7.1 14 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold Limit 
for deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of TDS 
Time of deduction 
exceeding ` 1 crore/ 
` 3 crore in case the 
recipient 
is 
a 
cooperative 
society, 
during the previous 
year, to any person 
from one or more 
accounts maintained 
by the recipient 
in cash > ` 20 
lakh 
during 
the P.Y. 
TDS 
- @2% of the
sum, 
where
cash
withdrawal >
` 20 lakhs but
≤ ` 1 crore/
` 3 crore in
case 
the
recipient is a
co-operative
society
- @5% of the
sum, 
where
cash withdrawal
>
` 1 crore/
` 3 crore in case
the recipient is
a co-operative
society
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
a
a
7.1 15
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold Limit 
for deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of TDS 
Time of deduction 
194P Pension 
(along 
with 
interest 
on 
bank 
account) 
Basic 
exemption 
limit 
[` 3,00,000 (in case 
specified 
senior 
citizen 
pays 
tax 
under default tax 
regime 
u/s 
115BAC), 
` 
3,00,000 
/ 
` 5,00,000, as the 
case may be, if 
specified 
senior 
citizen 
has 
exercised 
the 
option of shifting 
out of the default 
tax 
regime 
providing 
u/s 
115BAC] [i.e., total 
income after giving 
effect 
to 
the 
deduction 
allowable 
under 
Chapter VI-A, if any 
Notified 
specified 
bank 
Specified 
senior citizen 
i.e.,
An 
individual,
being
a 
resident
in 
India,
who 
-
is of the 
age 
of 
75
years or more 
at any time 
during the PY; 
-
is having 
pension
income 
and 
no 
other 
income except 
interest
income
received 
or
receivable
from 
any
account
maintained by
Rates in force, 
where 
the 
individual has 
exercised the 
option 
of 
shifting out of 
the default tax 
regime. 
Rates 
specified 
in 
section 
115BAC, 
where 
the 
individual 
pays 
tax 
under 
the 
default 
tax 
regime. 
INCOME TAX LAW 
7.1 16 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold Limit 
for deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of TDS 
Time of deduction 
allowable 
should 
exceed the basic 
exemption 
limit. 
Further, in case the 
individual 
is 
entitled to rebate 
u/s 87A from tax 
payable, then the 
same 
should 
be 
given effect to] 
such 
individual 
in 
the 
same 
specified bank 
in which he is 
receiving 
his 
pension 
income; and 
-
has
furnished 
a
declaration to
the 
specified 
bank. 
194Q Purchase 
of 
goods 
> ` 50 lakhs in a 
previous year
Buyer, 
who 
is 
responsible 
for 
paying any sum to 
any 
resident 
for 
purchase of goods. 
Buyer 
means 
a 
person whose total 
sales, gross receipts 
or 
turnover 
from 
business exceeds ` 10 
crores during the FY 
Any resident 
0.1% of sum 
exceeding 
` 50 lakhs 
At the time of credit of 
such 
sum 
to 
the 
account of the seller or 
at the time of payment, 
whichever is earlier. 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
a
a
7.1 17
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold Limit 
for deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of TDS 
Time of deduction 
immediately 
preceding the FY in 
which the purchase 
of goods is carried 
out. 
194R Any 
benefit 
or perquisite, 
whether 
convertible 
into 
money 
or 
not, 
arising 
from 
business 
or 
the 
exercise 
of 
a 
profession 
The 
provisions 
would apply 
to 
any 
benefit 
or 
perquisite, 
whether 
in 
cash 
or 
in 
Value or aggregate 
of value of benefit 
or 
perquisite 
>  
` 
20,000 
in 
a 
financial year 
Any 
person 
(other 
than an individual or 
HUF 
whose 
total 
sales, gross receipts 
or turnover do not 
exceed ` 1 crore in 
case of business or 
` 50 lakhs in case of 
profession during the 
immediately 
preceding 
F.Y.)
responsible 
for
providing 
to 
a 
resident, any benefit 
or perquisite. 
In case of a company, 
“person 
responsible 
for 
paying” 
means 
the 
company 
itself 
Any resident 
10% of value 
or aggre. of 
value of such 
benefit 
or 
perquisite 
Before providing such 
benefit or perquisite 
INCOME TAX LAW 
7.1 18 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Section 
Nature of 
payment 
Threshold Limit 
for deduction of 
tax at source 
Payer 
Payee 
Rate of TDS 
Time of deduction 
kind or partly 
in cash and 
partly in kind. 
including 
the 
Principal 
Officer 
thereof. 
Notes – 
(1)
Section 206AA requires furnishing of PAN by the deductee to the deductor, failing which the deductor has to
deduct tax at the higher of the following rates, namely, -
(i)
at the rate specified in the relevant provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961; or
(ii)
at the rate or rates in force; or
(iii)
at the rate of 20% and in case of section 194-Q, 5%
(2)
Section 206AB requires tax to be deducted at source under the provisions of this Chapter on any sum or income or
amount paid, or payable or credited, by a person to a specified person, at higher of the following rates –
(i)
at twice the rate prescribed in the relevant provision of the Act;
(ii)
at twice the rate or rates in force i.e., the rate mentioned in the Finance Act; or
(iii)
at 5%
However, section 206AB is not applicable in case of tax deductible at source under sections 192, 192A, 194B, 
194BA, 194BB, 194-IA, 194-IB, 194M11 or 194N. 
11 or section 194LBC (this section will be dealt with at the Final level) 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
a
a
7.1 19
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

Meaning of “specified person” – A person who has not furnished the return of income for the assessment year 
relevant to the previous year immediately preceding the financial year in which tax is required to be deducted, for 
which the time limit for furnishing the return of income under section 139(1) has expired, and the aggregate of tax 
deducted at source and tax collected at source in his case is ` 50,000 or more in the said previous year. 
However, the specified person would not include - 
- 
a non-resident who does not have a permanent establishment in India; or 
-
a person who is not required to furnish the return of income for the assessment year relevant to the said
previous year and is notified by the Central Government in this behalf.
(3)
In case the provisions of section 206AA are also applicable to the specified person, in addition to the provisions of
this section, then, tax is required to be deducted at higher of the two rates provided in section 206AA and section
206AB.
(4)
The threshold limit given in column (3) of the table is with respect to each payee.
INCOME TAX LAW 
7.1 20 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
7.1 2 1 
II 
Advance Payment of Tax 
Liability for payment of advance tax [Sections 207 & 208] 
Tax shall be payable in advance during any financial year in respect of the total 
income (TI) of the assessee which would be chargeable to tax for the A.Y. 
immediately following that financial year. 
Advance tax is payable during a F.Y. in every case where the amount of such tax 
payable by the assessee during the year is ` 10,000 or more. 
However, an individual resident in India of the age of 60 years or more at any 
time during the previous year, who does not have any income chargeable 
under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” (PGBP), is not 
liable to pay advance tax. 
Instalments of advance tax and due dates [Section 211] 
Advance tax payment schedule for corporates and non-corporates (other 
than an assessee computing profits on presumptive basis under section 
44AD or section 44ADA) – Four instalments 
Due date of instalment 
Amount payable 
On or before 15th June 
Not less than 15% of advance tax liability. 
On 
or 
before 
15th 
September 
Not less than 45% of advance tax liability (-) 
amount paid in earlier instalment. 
On 
or 
before 
15th 
December 
Not less than 75% of advance tax liability (-) 
amount paid in earlier instalment or instalments. 
On or before 15th March 
The whole amount of advance tax liability (-) 
amount paid in earlier instalment or instalments. 
Advance tax payment by assessees computing profits on presumptive 
basis under section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1) 
An eligible assessee, computing profits or gains of business or profession on 
presumptive basis in respect of eligible business referred to in section 44AD(1) 
or in respect of eligible profession referred to in section 44ADA(1), shall be 
required to pay advance tax of the whole amount on or before 15th March of 
the F.Y. 
However, any amount paid by way of advance tax on or before 31st March shall 
also be treated as advance tax paid during the F.Y. ending on that day. 
Interest for defaults in payment of advance tax [Section 234B] 
(1) 
Interest u/s 234B is attracted for non-payment of advance tax or payment 
of advance tax of an amount less than 90% of assessed tax. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.122 
(2) 
The interest liability would be 1% per month or part of the month from 
1st April following the F.Y. upto the date of determination of total income 
under section 143(1) and where regular assessment is made, upto the date 
of such regular assessment. 
(3) 
Such interest is calculated on the amount of difference between the 
assessed tax and the advance tax paid. 
(4) 
“Assessed tax” means the tax on total income determined u/s 143(1) less 
TDS & TCS, any relief of tax allowed u/s 89, any tax credit allowed to be 
set off in accordance with the provisions of section 115JD, in case the 
assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime 
provided under section 115BAC(1A). 
Tax on the total income determined under section 143(1) shall not include 
the additional income-tax, if any, payable u/s 140B. 
(5) 
Where self-assessment tax is paid by the assessee u/s 140A or otherwise, 
interest shall be calculated upto the date of payment of such tax and 
reduced by the interest, if any, paid u/s 140A towards the interest 
chargeable under this section. Thereafter, interest shall be calculated at 
1% on the amount by which the tax so paid together with the advance tax 
paid falls short of the assessed tax. 
Interest for deferment of advance tax [Section 234C] 
(1) Manner of computation of interest u/s 234C for deferment of 
advance tax by corporate and non-corporate assessees: 
In case an assessee, other than an assessee who declares profits and gains 
in accordance with the provisions of section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1), 
who is liable to pay advance tax u/s 208 has failed to pay such tax or the 
advance tax paid by such assessee on its current income on or before the 
dates specified in column (1) below is less than the specified percentage 
[given in column (2) below] of tax due on returned income, then simple 
interest@1% per month for the period specified in column (4) on the 
amount of shortfall, as per column (3) is leviable u/s 234C. 
Specified 
date 
Specified 
% 
Shortfall in advance tax 
Period 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
15th June 
15% 
15% of tax due on returned 
income (-) advance tax paid up 
to 15th June 
3 months 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
7.123 
15th 
September 
45% 
45% of tax due on returned 
income (-) advance tax paid up 
to 15th September 
3 months 
15th 
December 
75% 
75% of tax due on returned 
income (-) advance tax paid up 
to 15th December 
3 months 
15th March 
100% 
100% of tax due on returned 
income (-) advance tax paid up 
to 15th March 
1 month 
Note – However, if the advance tax paid by the assessee on the current 
income, on or before 15th June or 15th September, is not less than 12% or 
36% of the tax due on the returned income, respectively, then, the 
assessee shall not be liable to pay any interest on the amount of the 
shortfall on those dates. 
Tax due on returned income = Tax chargeable on total income declared 
in the return of income – TDS – TCS - any relief of tax allowed u/s 89 - any 
tax credit allowed to be set off in accordance with the provisions of 
section 115JD, in case the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of 
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). 
(2) Computation of interest under section 234C in case of an assessee 
who declares profits and gains in accordance with the provisions of 
section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1): 
In case an assessee who declares profits and gains in accordance with the 
provisions of section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1), who is liable to pay 
advance tax u/s 208 has failed to pay such tax or the advance tax paid by 
the assessee on its current income on or before 15th March is less than 
the tax due on the returned income, then, the assessee shall be liable to 
pay simple interest at the rate of 1% on the amount of the shortfall from 
the tax due on the returned income. 
(3) Non-applicability of interest under section 234C in certain cases: 
Interest under section 234C shall not be leviable in respect of any shortfall 
in payment of tax due on returned income, where such shortfall is on 
account of under-estimate or failure to estimate – 
(i)
the amount of capital gains;
(ii)
income of nature referred to in section 2(24)(ix) i.e., winnings from
lotteries, crossword puzzles etc.;
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.124 
(iii)
income under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”
in cases where the income accrues or arises under the said head for
the first time.
(iv)
the amount of dividend income other than deemed dividend referred
u/s 2(22)(e).
However, the assessee should have paid the whole of the amount of tax 
payable in respect of such income referred to in (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv), as the 
case may be, had such income been a part of the total income, as part of 
the remaining instalments of advance tax which are due or where no such 
instalments are due, by 31st March of the financial year. 
Tax Collection at source [Section 206C] 
(1) Sale of certain goods [Section 206C(1)] - Sellers of certain goods are 
required to collect tax from the buyers at the specified rates. The specified 
percentage for collection of tax at source is as follows: 
Nature of Goods 
Percentage 
(i) 
Alcoholic liquor for human consumption 
1% 
(ii) 
Tendu leaves 
5% 
(iii) 
Timber obtained under a forest lease 
2.5% 
(iv) 
Timber obtained by any mode other than (iii) 
2.5% 
(v) 
Any other forest produce not being timber or 
tendu leaves 
2.5% 
(vi) 
Scrap 
1% 
(vii) Minerals, being coal or lignite or iron ore 
1% 
The tax should be collected at the time of debiting of the amount payable 
by the buyer to his account or at the time of receipt of such amount from 
the buyer, whichever is earlier. 
However, no collection of tax shall be made in the case of a resident 
buyer, if such buyer furnishes a declaration in writing in duplicate to the 
effect that goods are to be utilised for the purpose of manufacturing, 
processing or producing articles or things or for the purposes of 
generation of power and not for trading purposes [Section 206C(1A)]. 
(2) 
Lease or a licence of parking lot, toll plaza or mine or a quarry 
[Section 206C(1C)] - Every person who grants a lease or a licence or 
enters into a contract or otherwise transfers any right or interest in any 
-
parking lot or
-
toll plaza or
-
a mine or a quarry
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
7.125 
to another person (other than a public sector company) for the use of 
such parking lot or toll plaza or mine or quarry for the purposes of 
business. The tax shall be collected as provided, from the licensee or 
lessee of any such licence, contract or lease of the specified nature, at the 
rate of 2%, at the time of debiting of the amount payable by the licensee 
or lessee to his account or at the time of receipt of such amount from the 
licensee or lessee, whichever is earlier 
(3) Sale of motor vehicle of value exceeding ` 10 lakhs [Section 
206C(1F)] - Every person, being a seller, who receives any amount as 
consideration for sale of a motor vehicle of the value exceeding ` 10 
lakhs, shall, at the time of receipt of such amount, collect tax from the 
buyer@1% of the sale consideration. 
(4) Remittance under LRS of RBI or purchase of an overseas tour package 
[Section 206C(1G)] - Every person, 
-
being an authorized dealer, who receives amount under the
Liberalised Remittance Scheme (LRS) of the RBI for remittance from
a buyer, being a person remitting such amount,
-
being seller of an overseas tour programme package who receives
any amount from the buyer who purchases the package
has to collect tax at the time of debiting of the amount payable by the 
buyer or at the time of receipt of such amount from the said buyer by any 
mode, whichever is earlier. 
Rate of TCS in case of collection by an authorized dealer/ seller of an 
overseas tour programme package 
S. 
No. 
Amount and purpose of remittance 
Rate of 
TCS 
upto 
30.9.2023 
Rate of 
TCS 
on or after 
1.10.2023 
(i) 
Where the amount is for purchase of 
an overseas tour programme package 
5% of such 
amount 
(without 
any 
threshold 
limit) 
5% till ` 7 
lakhs, 
20% thereafter
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.126 
(ii) 
(a)
Where the amount is remitted for
the purpose of education or
medical treatment; and
(b)
the amount or aggregate of the
amounts being remitted by a
buyer is less than ` 7 lakhs in a
financial year
Nil (No tax 
to 
be 
collected 
at source) 
Nil (No tax 
to 
be 
collected at 
source) 
(iii) 
(a)
Where the amount is remitted for 
the 
purpose 
other 
than 
mentioned in  (ii)  above; and
(b)
the amount or aggregate of the 
amounts being remitted by a 
buyer is less than ` 7 lakhs in a 
financial year 
Nil 
(No tax to 
be 
collected 
at source) 
(iv) 
(a)
where the amount is remitted for
the purpose of education or
medical treatment; and
(b)
the amount or aggregate of the
amounts in excess of ` 7 lakhs is
remitted by the buyer in a
financial year
5% of the 
amt 
or 
agg. 
of 
amts 
in 
excess 
of 
` 7 lakh 
5% of the 
amt or agg. 
of amts in 
excess 
of 
` 7 lakh 
(v) 
(a)
where the amount is remitted for 
the purpose other than mentioned 
in  (iv) above; and
(b)
the amount or aggregate of the 
amounts in excess of ` 7 lakhs is 
remitted 
by 
the 
buyer 
in 
a 
financial year 
5% of the 
amt 
or 
agg. 
of 
amts 
in 
excess 
of 
` 7 lakh 
(vi) 
(a)
where the amount being remitted
out is a loan obtained from any
financial institution as defined in
section 80E, for the purpose of
pursuing any education; and
(b)
the amount or aggregate of the
amounts in excess of ` 7 lakhs is
remitted by the buyer in a
financial year
0.5% 
of 
the amt or 
agg. 
of 
amts 
in 
excess 
of 
` 7 lakh 
0.5% of the 
amt or agg. 
of amts in 
excess 
of 
` 7 lakh 
Nil 
(No tax to 
be 
collected 
at source) 
20% of the 
amt 
or 
agg. 
of 
amts 
in 
excess 
of 
` 7 lakh 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
7.127 
Cases where no tax is to be collected 
(i) 
No TCS by the authorized dealer on an amount in respect of 
which the sum has been collected by the seller 
(ii) 
No TCS, if the buyer is liable to deduct tax at source under any 
other provision of the Act and has deducted such tax 
(iii) 
No TCS, if the buyer is the Central Government, a State 
Government, an embassy, a High Commission, a legation, a 
commission, a consulate, the trade representation of a foreign 
State, a local authority or any other person notified by the Central 
Government, subject to fulfillment of conditions stipulated 
thereunder. 
Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide notification no. 99/2022 dated 
17.8.2022, notified that the provisions of section 206C(1G) would 
not apply to a person (being a buyer) who is a non-resident in 
terms of section 6 and does not have a permanent establishment 
in India. 
(5) Sale of goods of value exceeding ` 50 lakh [Section 206C(1H)] - Every 
person, being a seller, who receives any amount as consideration for sale 
of goods of the value exceeding ` 50 lakhs in a previous year, other than 
exported goods or goods covered in (a)/(c)/(d)], is required to collect tax 
at source, at the time of receipt of such amount, @0.1% of the sale 
consideration exceeding ` 50 lakhs. 
However, tax is not required to be collected if the buyer is liable to deduct 
tax at source under any other provision of the Act on the goods 
purchased by him from the seller and has deducted such tax. 
(6) 
In case of non-furnishing of PAN [PAN or Aadhaar number in case of 
section 206C(1H)] by the collectee to the collector, tax is required to be 
collected at the higher of – 
(i)
twice the rate specified in the relevant provisions of the Act; or
(ii)
at 5% [1%, in case tax is required to be collected at source u/s
206C(1H)]. [Section 206CC]
However, the maximum the rate of TCS under this section shall not exceed 20%. 
The provisions of section 206CC do not apply to a non-resident who does 
not have a permanent establishment in India. 
(7) 
Section 206CCA requires tax to be collected at source on any sum or 
amount received by a person from a specified person, at higher of the 
following rates – 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.128 
(a)
at twice the rate specified in the relevant provision of the Act;
(b)
at 5%
However, the maximum the rate of TCS under this section shall not exceed 
20%. 
In case the provisions of section 206CC are also applicable to the specified 
person, in addition to the provisions of section 206CCA, then, tax is 
required to be collected at higher of the two rates provided in section 
206CC and section 206CCA. 
Meaning of “specified person” – A person who has not furnished the 
return of income for assessment year relevant to the previous year 
immediately preceding the financial year in which tax is required to be 
collected, for which the time limit for furnishing the return of income 
under section 139(1) has expired, and the aggregate of tax deducted at 
source and tax collected at source in his case is ` 50,000 or more in the 
said previous year. 
However, the specified person would not include 
-
a non-resident who does not have a permanent establishment in
India ; or
-
a person who is not required to furnish the return of income for the
assessment year relevant to the said previous year and is notified by
the Central Government in this behalf.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.129 
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
1. 
Ashwin doing manufacture and wholesale trade furnishes you the following 
information: 
Total turnover for the financial year - 
Particulars 
` 
2022-23 
1,05,00,000 
2023-24 
95,00,000 
Examine whether tax deduction at source provisions are attracted for the 
below said expenses incurred during the financial year 2023-24: 
Particulars 
` 
Interest paid to UCO Bank on 15.8.2023 
41,000 
Contract payment to Raj (2 contracts of ` 12,000 each) on 
12.12.2023 
24,000 
Shop rent paid (one payee) on 21.1.2024 
2,50,000 
Commission paid to Balu on 15.3.2024 
7,000 
2. 
Compute the amount of tax deduction at source on the following payments 
made by M/s S Ltd. during the financial year 2023-24 as per the provisions of 
the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
S. 
No. 
Date 
Nature of Payment 
(i) 
1-10-2023 
Payment of ` 2,00,000 to Mr. R, a transporter who 
owns 8 goods carriages throughout the previous year 
and furnishes a declaration to this effect alongwith his 
PAN. 
(ii) 
1-11-2023 
Payment of fee for technical services of ` 25,000 and 
Royalty of ` 20,000 to Mr. Shyam who is having PAN. 
(iii) 
30-06-2023 
Payment of ` 25,000 to M/s X Ltd. for repair of 
building. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.130 
(iv) 
01-01-2024
Payment of ` 2,00,000 made to Mr. A for purchase of 
diaries 
made 
according 
to 
specifications 
of 
M/s S Ltd. However, no material was supplied for such 
diaries to Mr. A by M/s S Ltd or its associates. 
(v) 
01-01-2024
Payment of ` 2,30,000 made to Mr. Bharat for 
compulsory acquisition of his house as per law of the 
State Government. 
(vi) 
01-02-2024
Payment of commission of ` 14,000 to Mr. Y. 
3.
Examine the applicability of TDS provisions and TDS amount in the following
cases:
(a)
Rent paid for hire of machinery by B Ltd. to Mr. Raman ` 2,60,000 on
27.9.2023.
(b)
Fee paid on 1.12.2023 to Dr. Srivatsan by Sundar (HUF) ` 35,000 for
surgery performed on a member of the family.
(c)
ABC and Co. Ltd. paid ` 19,000 to one of its Directors as sitting fees on
01-01-2023.
4.
Examine the applicability of tax deduction at source provisions, the rate and
amount of tax deduction in the following cases for the F.Y. 2023-24:
(1)
Payment made by a company to Mr. Ram, sub-contractor, ` 3,00,000 with
outstanding balance of ` 1,20,000 shown in the books as on 31.3.2024.
(2)
Winning from horse race ` 1,50,000 paid to Mr. Shyam, an Indian
resident.
(3)
` 2,00,000 paid to Mr. A, a resident individual, on 22-02-2024 by the
State of Uttar Pradesh on compulsory acquisition of his urban land.
5.
Briefly discuss the provisions relating to payment of advance tax on
income arising from capital gains and casual income.
ANSWERS 
1.
As the turnover of business carried on by Ashwin for F.Y. 2022-23, has
exceeded ` 1 crore, he has to comply with the tax deduction provisions
during the financial year 2023-24, subject to, the exemptions provided for
under the relevant sections for applicability of TDS provisions.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.131 
Interest paid to UCO Bank  
TDS under section 194A is not attracted in respect of interest paid to a 
banking company. 
Contract payment of ` 24,000 to Raj for 2 contracts of ` 12,000 each 
TDS provisions under section 194C would not be attracted if the amount 
paid to a contractor does not exceed ` 30,000 in a single payment or  
` 1,00,000 in the aggregate during the financial year. Therefore, TDS 
provisions under section 194C are not attracted in this case. 
Shop Rent paid to one payee – Tax has to be deducted@10% under 
section 194-I as the annual rental payment exceeds ` 2,40,000. 
Commission paid to Balu – No, tax has to be deducted under section 194H 
in this case as the commission does not exceed ` 15,000. 
2.   (i) 
No tax is required to be deducted at source under section 194C by 
M/s S Ltd. on payment to transporter Mr. R, since he satisfies the 
following conditions: 
(1) 
He owns ten or less goods carriages at any time during the 
previous year. 
(2) 
He is engaged in the business of plying, hiring or leasing goods 
carriages;  
(3) 
He has furnished a declaration to this effect along with his PAN. 
(ii) 
As per section 194J, liability to deduct tax is attracted only in case the 
payment made as fees for technical services and royalty, individually, 
exceeds ` 30,000 during the financial year. In the given case, since, the 
individual payments for fee of technical services i.e., ` 25,000 and 
royalty ` 20,000 is less than ` 30,000 each, there is no liability to 
deduct tax at source. It is assumed that no other payment towards 
fees for technical services and royalty were made during the year to 
Mr. Shyam. 
(iii) Provisions of section 194C are not attracted in this case, since the 
payment for repair of building on 30.06.2023 to M/s X Ltd. is less than 
the threshold limit of ` 30,000.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.132 
(iv)
According to section 194C, the definition of “work” does not include
the manufacturing or supply of product according to the specification
by customer in case the material is purchased from a person other
than the customer or associate of such customer.
Therefore, there is no liability to deduct tax at source in respect of
payment of ` 2,00,000 to Mr. A, since the contract is a contract for
‘sale’.
(v)
As per section 194LA, any person responsible for payment to a
resident, any sum in the nature of compensation or consideration on
account of compulsory acquisition under any law, of any immovable
property, is responsible for deduction of tax at source if such payment
or the aggregate amount of such payments to the resident during the
financial year exceeds ` 2,50,000.
In the given case, no liability to deduct tax at source is attracted as the
payment made does not exceed ` 2,50,000.
(vi)
As per section 194H, tax is deductible at source if the amount of
commission or brokerage or the aggregate of the amounts of
commission or brokerage credited or paid during the financial year
exceeds ` 15,000.
Since the commission payment made to Mr. Y does not exceed
` 15,000, the provisions of section 194H are not attracted.
3.
(a)
Since the rent paid for hire of machinery by B. Ltd. to Mr. Raman
exceeds ` 2,40,000, the provisions of section 194-I for deduction of tax
at source are attracted.
The rate applicable for deduction of tax at source under section 194-I
on rent paid for hire of plant and machinery is 2%, assuming that
Mr. Raman had furnished his permanent account number to B Ltd.
Therefore, the amount of tax to be deducted at source:
= ` 2,60,000 x 2% = ` 5,200.
Note:  In case Mr. Raman does not furnish his permanent account
number to B Ltd., tax shall be deducted @ 20% on ` 2,60,000, by
virtue of provisions of section 206AA.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 
 
 
 
 
7.133 
(b) 
As per the provisions of section 194J, a Hindu Undivided Family is 
required to deduct tax at source on fees paid for professional services 
only if the total sales, gross receipts or turnover form the business or 
profession exceed ` 1 crore in case of business or ` 50 lakhs in case of 
profession, as the case may be, in the financial year preceding the 
current financial year and such payment made for professional 
services is not exclusively for the personal purpose of any member of 
Hindu Undivided Family. 
 
Section 194M, provides for deduction of tax at source by a HUF (which 
is not required to deduct tax at source under section 194J) in respect 
of fees for professional service if such sum or aggregate of such sum 
exceeds ` 50 lakhs during the financial year. 
 
In the given case, the fees for professional service to Dr. Srivatsan is 
paid on 1.12.2023 for a personal purpose, therefore, section 194J is 
not attracted. Section 194M would have been attracted, if the 
payment or aggregate of payments exceeded ` 50 lakhs in the 
P.Y.2023-24. However, since the payment does not exceed ` 50 lakh in 
this case, there is no liability to deduct tax at source under section 
194M also.  
(c) 
Section 194J provides for deduction of tax at source @10% from any 
sum paid by way of any remuneration or fees or commission, by 
whatever name called, to a resident director, which is not in the nature 
of salary on which tax is deductible under section 192. The threshold 
limit of ` 30,000 upto which the provisions of tax deduction at source 
are not attracted in respect of every other payment covered under 
section 194J is, however, not applicable in respect of sum paid to a 
director. 
 
Therefore, tax@10% has to be deducted at source under section 194J 
in respect of the sum of ` 19,000 paid by ABC Ltd. to its director. 
 
Therefore, the amount of tax to be deducted at source: 
 
= ` 19,000 x 10% = ` 1,900 
4.   (1) 
Provisions of tax deduction at source under section 194C are attracted 
in respect of payment by a company to a sub-contractor. Under 
section 194C, tax is deductible at the time of credit or payment, 
whichever is earlier @ 1% in case the payment is made to an 
individual. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
7.134 
Since the aggregate amount credited or paid during the year is 
` 4,20,000, tax is deductible @ 1% on ` 4,20,000. 
Tax to be deducted = ` 4,20,000 x 1% = ` 4,200 
(2)
Under section 194BB, tax is to be deducted at source, if the winnings
from horse races exceed ` 10,000. The rate of deduction of tax at
source is 30%.
Hence, tax to be deducted = ` 1,50,000 x 30% = ` 45,000.
(3)
As per section 194LA, any person responsible for payment to a
resident, any sum in the nature of compensation or consideration on
account of compulsory acquisition under any law, of any immovable
property, is required to deduct tax at source, if such payment or the
aggregate amount of such payments to the resident during the
financial year exceeds ` 2,50,000.
In the given case, there is no liability to deduct tax at source as the
payment made to Mr. A does not exceed ` 2,50,000.
5.
The proviso to section 234C contains the provisions for payment of advance
tax in case of capital gains and casual income.
Advance tax is payable by an assessee on his/its total income, which
includes capital gains and casual income like income from lotteries,
crossword puzzles, etc.
Since it is not possible for the assessee to estimate his capital gains, or
income from lotteries etc., it has been provided that if any such income
arises after the due date for any instalment, then, the entire amount of the
tax payable (after considering tax deducted at source) on such capital gains
or casual income should be paid in the remaining instalments of advance
tax, which are due.
Where no such instalment is due, the entire tax should be paid by 31st
March of the relevant financial year.
No interest liability on late payment would arise if the entire tax liability is so paid.
Note: In case of casual income the entire tax liability is fully deductible at 
source @30% under section 194B, 194BA and 194BB. Therefore, advance tax 
liability would arise only if the surcharge, if any, and health and education 
cess@4% in respect thereof, along with tax liability in respect of other income, 
if any, is 10,000 or more. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
