LEARNING OUTCOMES 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 
6
  
DEDUCTIONS FROM  
 
 
GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
 
After studying this chapter, you would be able to – 
♦
appreciate the types of deductions allowable from gross total income 
under the default tax regime under section 115BAC; 
♦
appreciate the types of deductions allowable from gross total income, 
if the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default 
tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) and is paying tax under 
the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act; 
♦
identify the assessees eligible for deduction under various sections; 
♦
compute deductions in respect of payments, applying the provisions 
under the relevant sections; 
♦
compute deductions in respect of certain income, applying the 
provisions under the relevant sections; 
♦
compute the deduction allowable in the case of a person with disability; 
♦
compute the deduction available under section 10AA for units 
established in SEZs considering the conditions specified thereunder. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME
6.2
     Section 80C– In respect of LIP, PPF, PF etc. 
    Section 80JJAA – In respect of employment of new employees 
Section 80CCC– In respect of contribution to certain pension funds        Section 80RRB – In respect of royalty on patents 
Section 80CCD – In respect of contribution to pension scheme of           Section 80QQB – In respect of royalty income etc. of authors  
      of Central Government 
of certain books other than text books 
Section 80CCH – In respect of contribution to Agnipath scheme 
Section 80D – In respect of medical insurance premium 
Section 80DD – In repect of maintenance including medical treatment of a dependent disabled 
Section 80DDB – In respect of amount paid for medical treatment etc. of specified disease or ailment 
Section 80E – In respect of interest on loan taken for higher education 
Section 80EE/80EEA – In respect of interest payable on loan borrowed for acquisition of house property by an individual 
Section 80EEB – In respect of  interest payable on loan taken for purchase of electric vehicle 
Section 80G – In respect of donations to certain funds, charitable instutions etc. 
Section 80TTA – In respect of interest on deposits  
      in savings account 
Section 80GG – In respect of rent paid 
Section 80TTB – In respect of interest on  
      deposits in case of senior citizens 
Section 80GGA – In respect of donations for scientific research and rural development 
Section 80GGB – In respect of contributions given by companies to political parties  
Section 80U – Deduction in case of a 
person with disability 
Section 80GGC –In respect of contributions given by any person to political parties 
Note – Only deductions u/s 80CCD(2) [Employer’s contribution to pension scheme of Central Government], 80CCH(2) [Central 
Government’s contribution to assessee’s account in Agniveer Corpus Fund] and section 80JJAA would be available if the eligible assessee 
pays tax at concessional rates of tax u/s 115BAC under the default tax regime. 
Deductions in respect of certain 
payments 
Deductions in respect of certain 
incomes 
Deductions from Gross Total Income under the 
optional tax regime (i.e., normal provisions of the Act) 
Deductions in respect of other 
income 
Other 
Deductions 
Deductions under Chapter VI -A
Deduction under section 10AA
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
 
INCOME TAX LAW
6. 2 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME
6.3
1.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
The various items of income referred to in the different clauses of section 10 are 
excluded from the total income of an assessee. These incomes are known as exempted 
incomes. “Exemption” means exclusion. A particular income exempt from tax under 
section 10 shall not enter into the computation of taxable income.  However, there 
are certain items of income referred to in section 10 which are not exempted if the 
assessee pays concessional rates of tax under the default tax regime u/s 115BAC, 
namely, 
10(5) 
Leave travel concession 
10(13A) House Rent Allowance 
10(14) 
Special Allowances except - 
(a) Travelling allowance
(b) Daily allowance
(c)
Conveyance allowance
(d) Transport allowance to blind/deaf and dumb/orthopedically
handicapped employee
10(17) 
Daily allowance/Constituency allowance received by any Member of 
Parliament or of State Legislatures 
10(32) 
Exemption in respect of income of minor child included in assessee’s 
total income 
“Deduction” in relation to Chapter VI-A and section 10AA refers to the amount that 
is reduced from gross total income to arrive at the total income. There are incomes 
which are included in gross total income but are wholly or partly allowed as 
deduction under Chapter VI-A in computation of total income, if the assessee has 
exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 
115BAC(1A) and pays tax as per the optional tax regime under the normal provisions 
of the Act.  
Deduction is allowed on specific investments or expenses incurred by the taxpayer to 
promote the culture of savings and investments. This could include medical 
expenditure, donations made to charities, investments made in specific avenues such 
as Public Provident Fund (PPF), National Pension Scheme (NPS) etc. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW
 
6.4 
However, if the assessee pays concessional rates of tax under default tax regime u/s 
115BAC, only deduction in respect of employer’s contribution to NPS u/s 80CCD(2), 
Central Government’s contribution to Agnipath Scheme u/s 80CCH(2) and deduction 
in respect of employment of new employees u/s 80JJAA would be allowed to the 
assessee. He cannot claim deduction under any other provision in Chapter VI-A under 
the default tax regime.    
Section 10AA also provides for a deduction in respect of units established in SEZ from 
the total income of the assessee. It is available only if the assessee has exercised the 
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). 
This deduction is not available if the assessee pays concessional rates of tax under 
the default tax regime u/s 115BAC. 
The tax liability is calculated on the “total income” which is arrived after reducing 
permissible deductions from gross total income.  
Students should note this very important difference between exemption under section 
10 and the deduction under Chapter VI-A/10AA. 
Difference between Deduction under Chapter VI-A & section 10AA and 
Exemption under section 10 
Particulars 
Deduction 
(in relation to Chapter VI-A and 
section 10AA) 
Exemption 
(contained in section 10) 
Meaning 
Investments/ contributions in certain 
instruments (as prescribed under the 
Income-tax Act). Payments made for 
certain purposes. 
The 
incomes 
which 
are 
exempt under section 10 will 
not be included in computing 
gross total income. 
Relevant 
Sections 
Sections 80C to 80U in Chapter VI-A 
and section 10AA of the Income-tax 
Act. 
Section 10 of the Income-tax 
Act. 
Manner of 
treatment 
First included in the Gross Total 
Income and then deductions will be 
allowed from Gross Total Income. 
Not included in the Gross 
Total Income.
The important point to be noted here is that if there is no gross total income, then no 
deductions will be permissible. This Chapter contains deduction under Chapter VI-A 
which includes deductions in respect of certain payments, deductions in respect of 
certain incomes, deductions in respect of other income and other deductions. It also 
includes deduction under section 10AA.   
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.5 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
Section 80A 
(i) 
Section 80A(1) provides that in computing the total income of an assessee, 
there shall be allowed from his gross total income, the deductions specified 
in sections 80C to 80U if the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out 
of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). 
(ii) 
According to section 80A(2), the aggregate amount of the deductions under 
this chapter shall not, in any case, exceed the gross total income of the 
assessee. Therefore, the total income after deductions will either be positive 
or nil. It cannot be negative due to deductions. 
 
An assessee cannot have a loss as a result of the deduction under Chapter VI-
A and claim to carry forward the same for the purpose of set-off against his 
income in the subsequent year. 
(iii) 
Section 80A(3) provides that in the case of AOP/BOI exercising the option of 
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), if 
any deduction is admissible under section 80G/80GGA/80GGC1, no deduction 
under the same section shall be made in computing the total income of a 
member of the AOP or BOI in relation to the share of such member in the 
income of the AOP or BOI. 
(iv) 
The profits and gains allowed as deduction under section 10AA or under any 
provision of Chapter VI-A under the heading "C.-Deductions in respect of 
certain incomes" in any assessment year, shall not be allowed as deduction 
under any other provision of the Act for such assessment year [Section 
80A(4)]. 
(v) 
The deduction, referred to in (iv) above, shall not exceed the profits and gains 
of the undertaking or unit or enterprise or eligible business, as the case may 
be [Section 80A(4)]. 
(vi) 
No deduction under any of the provisions referred to in (iv) above, shall be 
allowed if the deduction has not been claimed in the return of income 
[Section 80A(5)]. 
(vii) The transfer price of goods and services between such undertaking or unit or 
enterprise or eligible business and any other business of the assessee shall 
180-IA/80-IB/80-IE (these sections will be dealt with at the Final level)
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.6 
be determined at the market value of such goods or services as on the date 
of transfer [Section 80A(6)].   
(viii) For this purpose, the expression "market value" has been defined to mean,- 
(a) 
in relation to any goods or services sold or supplied, the price that such 
goods or services would fetch if these were sold by the undertaking or 
unit or enterprise or eligible business in the open market, subject to 
statutory or regulatory restrictions, if any;  
(b) 
in relation to any goods or services acquired, the price that such goods 
or services would cost if these were acquired by the undertaking or unit 
or enterprise or eligible business from the open market, subject to 
statutory or regulatory restrictions, if any; 
(ix) 
Where a deduction under any provision of this Chapter under the heading “C 
– Deductions in respect of certain incomes” is claimed and allowed to an 
assessee exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided 
under section 115BAC(1A), in respect of the profits of such specified business 
for any assessment year, no deduction under section 35AD is permissible in 
relation to such specified business for the same or any other assessment year.  
 
In short, once the assessee has claimed the benefit of deduction under 
section 35AD for a particular year in respect of a specified business, he cannot 
claim benefit under Chapter VI-A under the heading “C.-Deductions in 
respect of certain incomes” for the same or any other year and vice versa. 
Further, if the assessee pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC, 
neither deduction under section 35AD nor deductions under Chapter VI-A 
under the heading “C.-Deductions in respect of certain incomes” would be 
available to him. 
Section 80AB 
Deductions specified in Chapter VI-A under the heading “C.-Deductions in respect 
of certain incomes”, shall be allowed only to the extent such income computed in 
accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 is included in the gross 
total income of the assessee.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.7 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
Section 80AC: Furnishing return of income on or before due 
date mandatory for claiming deduction under Chapter VI-A 
under the heading “C. – Deductions in respect of certain 
incomes" 
(i) 
Section 80AC stipulates compulsory filing of return of income on or 
before the due date specified under section 139(1), as a pre-condition 
for availing benefit of deductions under any provision of Chapter VI-A 
under the heading “C. – Deductions in respect of certain incomes”. 
Table showing the deductions contained in Chapter VI-A under the  
heading “C. – Deductions in respect of certain income” 
Section 
Deduction 
80-IA 
Deductions in respect of profits and gains from undertakings or 
enterprises engaged in infrastructure development/ operation/ 
maintenance, generation/ transmission/ distribution of power 
etc.  
80-IAB 
Deduction in respect of profits and gains derived by an 
undertaking or enterprise engaged in development of SEZ 
80-IAC 
Deduction in respect of profits and gains derived by an eligible 
start-up from an eligible business
80-IB 
Deduction in respect of profits and gains from certain industrial 
undertakings 
other 
than 
infrastructure 
development 
undertakings 
80-IBA 
Deduction in respect of profits and gains from housing 
projects/rental housing projects 
80-IE 
Deduction in respect of profits and gains from manufacture or 
production of eligible article or thing, substantial expansion to 
manufacture or produce any eligible article or thing or carrying 
on of eligible business in North-Eastern States 
80JJA 
Deduction in respect of profits and gains from business of 
collecting and processing of bio-degradable waste 
80JJAA 
Deduction in respect of employment of new employees 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.8 
80LA 
Deduction in respect of certain income of Offshore Banking 
Units and International Financial Services Centre  
80M 
Deduction in respect of certain inter-corporate dividends  
80P 
Deduction in respect of income of co-operative societies 
80PA 
Deduction in respect of certain income of Producer Companies 
80QQB 
Deduction in respect of royalty income, etc., of authors of certain 
books other than text books 
80RRB 
Deduction in respect of royalty on patents 
(ii) 
The effect of this provision is that, in case of failure to file return of income 
on or before the stipulated due date, the undertakings would lose the benefit 
of deduction under these sections. 
Note: The deductions under section 80-IA to 80-IE, 80JJA, 80LA, 80M, 80P and 80PA 
in respect of certain incomes will be dealt with in detail at the Final Level. 
ILLUSTRATION 1 
Examine the following statements with regard to the provisions of the Income-tax 
Act, 1961: 
(a) 
For grant of deduction under section 80JJAA, filing of audit report in prescribed 
form is must for a corporate assessee; filing of return within the due date laid 
down in section 139(1) is not required. 
(b) 
Filing of belated return under section 139(4) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 will 
debar an assessee from claiming deduction under section 80QQB if the assessee 
exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under 
section 115BAC(1A) (i.e., he pays tax under the optional tax regime). 
SOLUTION 
(a) 
The statement is not correct. Section 80AC stipulates compulsory filing of 
return of income on or before the due date specified under section 139(1), as 
a pre-condition for availing the benefit of deduction, inter alia, under section 
80JJAA. 
(b) 
The statement is correct. As per section 80AC, the assessee has to furnish 
his return of income on or before the due date specified under section 139(1),
to be eligible to claim deduction under, inter alia, section 80QQB. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.9 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
Section 80B(5) 
“Gross total income” means the total income computed in accordance with the 
provisions of the Act without making any deduction under Chapter VI-A.  
“Computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act” implies— 
(i) 
that deductions under appropriate computation section have already been 
given effect to; 
(ii) 
that income of other persons, if includible under sections 60 to 64, has been 
included; 
(iii) 
the intra head and/or inter head losses have been adjusted; and 
(iv) 
that unabsorbed brought forward business losses, unabsorbed depreciation 
etc., have been set-off. 
Two types of deductions are allowable from Gross Total Income - Deductions under 
Chapter VI-A and deduction under section 10AA which are discussed in this chapter.  
 
 
 
2.  DEDUCTIONS 
IN 
RESPECT 
OF 
CERTAIN 
PAYMENTS 
2.1 Deduction in respect of investment in specified assets 
[Section 80C]  
 
[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out 
of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)] 
(i) 
Deduction in respect of investment/ contributions 
 
Section 80C provides for a deduction from the Gross Total Income of savings 
in specified modes of investments. The deduction under section 80C is 
Deductions from Gross Total Income 
Deductions under Chapter VI-A 
2. Deductions in 
respect of certain 
payments 
3. Deductions in 
respect 
of 
certain incomes 
4. Deductions 
in respect of 
other incomes
5. Other 
Deductions 
6. Deduction 
under 
section 10AA
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.10 
available only to an individual or HUF exercising the option of shifting out of 
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). It is not allowable 
under the default tax regime under section 115BAC.  
The maximum permissible deduction under section 80C is ` 1,50,000. The 
following are the investments/ contributions eligible for deduction – 
(1) 
Contribution in Unit-linked Insurance Plan 1971 
 
Contributions in the name of the individual, his or her spouse or any child of 
the individual for participation in the Unit-linked Insurance Plan 1971. In case 
of a HUF, the contribution can be in the name of any member.  
(2) 
Contribution in Unit-linked Insurance Plan of LIC Mutual Fund 
 
Contributions in the name of the individual, his or her spouse or any child of 
the individual for participation in any Unit linked Insurance Plan of the LIC 
Mutual Fund. In case of a HUF, the contribution can be in the name of any 
member. 
(3) 
Premium paid in respect of Life Insurance policy 
Premium paid on insurance on the life of the individual, spouse or any child 
(minor or major) and in the case of HUF, any member thereof. This will include 
a life policy and an endowment policy.   
 
The following is a tabular summary of the deduction allowable under section 
80C vis-à-vis the date of issue of such policies – 
 
Deduction u/s 80C 
In 
respect 
of 
policies 
issued 
before 31.3.2012 
Premium paid to the extent of 20% of “actual capital 
sum assured”. 
In 
respect 
of 
policies issued on 
or after 1.4.2012 
but 
before 
1.4.2013 
Premium paid to the extent of 10% of “actual capital sum 
assured” i.e., minimum amount assured under the policy 
on happening of the insured event at any time during 
the term of the policy, not taking into account – 
(i)  the value of any premium agreed to be returned; 
or 
(ii) any benefit by way of bonus or otherwise over and 
above the sum actually assured, which is to be or 
may be received under the policy by any person. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.11 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
In 
respect 
of 
policies issued on 
or after 1.4.2013 
 
(a) Where the insurance is on the life of a person 
with disability or severe disability as referred 
to in section 80U or a person suffering from 
disease or ailment as specified under section 
80DDB.  
Premium paid to the extent of 15% of “actual 
capital sum assured” [has the same meaning as 
described above]. 
(b) Where the insurance is on the life of any 
person, other than mentioned in (a) above 
Premium paid to the extent of 10% of “actual 
capital sum assured” [has the same meaning as 
described above]. 
ILLUSTRATION 2 
Compute the eligible deduction under section 80C for A.Y.2024-25 in respect of 
life insurance premium paid by Mr. Ganesh during the P.Y.2023-24, the details 
of which are given hereunder, if Mr. Ganesh has exercised the option of shifting 
out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) –  
 
Date of 
issue of 
policy 
Person insured 
Actual 
capital sum 
assured (`) 
Insurance 
premium paid 
during 2023-24 
(`) 
(i) 
30/3/2012 Self 
8,00,000 
48,000 
(ii) 
1/5/2018 
Spouse 
1,50,000 
20,000 
(iii) 1/6/2021 
Handicapped son 
(section 80U disability) 
4,00,000 
80,000 
SOLUTION 
 
Date of 
issue of 
policy 
Person 
insured 
Actual 
capital 
sum 
assured 
(`) 
Insurance 
premium 
paid during 
2023-24 
(`) 
Deduct-
ion u/s 
80C for 
A.Y.2024-
25 
(`) 
Remark 
(restricted 
to % of 
sum 
assured) 
(`) 
(i) 30/3/2012 
Self 
8,00,000
48,000 
48,000 
20% 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.12 
(ii) 1/5/2018 
Spouse 
1,50,000
20,000 
15,000 
10% 
(iii) 1/6/2021 
Handicapped 
son 
(section 
80U disability) 
4,00,000
80,000 
60,000 
15% 
 
Total 
1,23,000 
 
ILLUSTRATION 3 
What would your answer if Mr. Ganesh pays tax under default tax regime under 
section 115BAC?  
SOLUTION 
If Mr. Ganesh pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC, he 
would not be eligible for deduction under section 80C.  
(4) 
Premium paid in respect of a contract for deferred annuity 
 
Premium paid to effect and keep in force a contract for a deferred annuity on 
the life of the individual and/or his or her spouse or any child, provided such 
contract does not contain any provision for the exercise by the insured of an 
option to receive cash payments in lieu of the payment of the annuity.  
 
It is pertinent to note here that a contract for a deferred annuity need not 
necessarily be with an insurance company. It follows therefore that such a 
contract can be entered into with any person. 
(5) 
Any sum deducted from the salary payable of a Government employee 
for securing a deferred annuity 
 
Amount deducted by or on behalf of the Government from the salary of a 
Government employee in accordance with the conditions of his service for 
securing a deferred annuity or making provision for his spouse or children. 
The excess, if any, over one-fifth of the salary is to be ignored.  
(6) 
Contribution to SPF/PPF/RPF 
 
Contributions to any provident fund to which the Provident Funds Act, 1925 
applies and recognized provident fund qualifies for deduction under section 
80C. 
 
Contribution made to any Provident Fund set up by the Central Government 
and notified in his behalf (i.e., the Public Provident Fund established under 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.13 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
the Public Provident Fund Scheme, 1968) also qualifies for deduction under 
section 80C. Such contribution can be made in the name of the individual, his 
spouse and any child of the individual; and any member of the family, in case 
of a HUF. The maximum limit for deposit in PPF is ` 1,50,000 in a year. 
ILLUSTRATION 4 
An individual assessee, resident in India, has made the following 
deposit/payment during the previous year 2023-24: 
Particulars 
` 
Contribution to the public provident fund 
1,50,000 
Insurance premium paid on the life of the spouse (policy taken 
on 1.4.2018) (Assured value ` 2,00,000) 
25,000 
What is the deduction allowable under section 80C for A.Y.2024-25 if the 
assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime 
provided under section 115BAC(1A)? 
SOLUTION   
Computation of deduction under section 80C for A.Y.2024-25 
Particulars 
` 
Deposit in public provident fund 
1,50,000 
Insurance premium paid on the life of the spouse  
(Maximum 10% of the assured value ` 2,00,000, as the policy is 
taken after 31.3.2012) 
 
 
20,000 
Total  
1,70,000 
However, the maximum permissible deduction u/s 80C is 
restricted to 
1,50,000 
(7) 
Contribution to approved superannuation Fund 
 
Contribution by an employee to an approved superannuation fund qualifies 
for deduction under section 80C. 
(8) 
Any sum paid or deposited in Sukanya Samriddhi Account 
 
Subscription to any such security of the Central Government or any such 
deposit scheme as the Central Government as may notify in the Official 
Gazette. Accordingly, Sukanya Samriddhi Scheme has been notified to 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.14 
provide that any sum paid or deposited during the previous year in the said 
Scheme, by an individual in the name of – 
(a) 
any girl child of the individual; or 
(b) 
any girl child for whom such individual is the legal guardian 
would be eligible for deduction under section 80C. 
Exemption 
on 
payment 
from 
Sukanya 
Samriddhi 
Account  
[Section 10(11A)] 
Section 10(11A) provides that any payment from an account opened in 
accordance with the Sukanya Samriddhi Account Rules, 2014, made under the 
Government Savings Bank Act, 1873, shall not be included in the total income 
of the assessee. Accordingly, the interest accruing on deposits in, and 
withdrawals from any account under the said scheme would be exempt. 
(9) 
Subscription to National Savings Certificates VIII 
 
Subscription to any Savings Certificates under the Government Savings 
Certificates Act, 1959 notified by the Central Government in the Official 
Gazette (i.e. National Savings Certificate (VIII Issue) issued under the 
Government Savings Certificates Act, 1959). 
(10) Contribution to approved annuity plan of LIC 
 
Contributions to approved annuity plans of LIC (New Jeevan Dhara and New 
Jeevan Akshay, New Jeevan Dhara I and New Jeevan Akshay I, II and III) or any 
other insurer as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify in this behalf. 
(11) Subscription towards notified units of mutual fund or UTI 
 
Subscription to any units of any mutual fund or from the Administrator or the 
specified company under any plan formulated in accordance with such 
scheme notified by the Central Government; 
(12) Contribution to notified pension fund set up by mutual fund or UTI 
 
Contribution by an individual to a pension fund set up by any Mutual Fund 
or by the Administrator or the specified company as the Central Government 
may specify (i.e., UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund set up by the specified 
company referred to in section 2(h) of the Unit Trust of India (Transfer of 
Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2002 as a pension fund). 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

6.15 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
(13) Contribution to National Housing Bank (Tax Saving) Term Deposit
Scheme, 2008
Subscription to any deposit scheme or contribution to any pension fund set
up by the National Housing Bank i.e., National Housing Bank (Tax Saving)
Term Deposit Scheme, 2008.
(14) Subscription to notified deposit scheme
Subscription to any such deposit scheme of
•
a public sector company which is engaged in providing long-term
finance for construction, or purchase of houses in India for residential
purposes; or
•
any such deposit scheme of any authority constituted in India by or
under any law enacted either for the purpose of dealing with and
satisfying the need for housing accommodation or for the purpose of
planning, development or improvement of cities, towns and villages or
for both.
The deposit scheme should be notified by the Central Government, for 
example, public deposit scheme of HUDCO. 
(15) Payment of tuition fees to any university, college, school or other
educational institution within India for full-time education for
maximum 2 children
Payment of tuition fees by an individual assessee at the time of admission or
thereafter to any university, college, school or other educational
institutions within India for the purpose of full-time education of any two
children of the individual. This benefit is only for the amount of tuition fees
for full-time education and shall not include any payment towards
development fees or donation or payment of similar nature and payment
made for education to any institution situated outside India.
(16) Repayment of housing loan including stamp duty, registration fee and
other expenses
Any payment made towards the cost of purchase or construction of a new
residential house property.  The income from such property –
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.16 
(i) 
should be chargeable to tax under the head “Income from house 
property”; 
(ii) 
would have been chargeable to tax under the head “Income from house 
property” had it not been used for the assessee’s own residence. 
 
The approved types of payments are as follows: 
(a) 
Any instalment or part payment of the amount due under any self-
financing or other schemes of any development authority, Housing 
Board or other authority engaged in the construction and sale of house 
property on ownership basis; or 
(b) 
Any instalment or part payment of the amount due to any company or 
a cooperative society of which the assessee is a shareholder or member 
towards the cost of house allotted to him; or 
(c) 
Repayment of amount borrowed by the assessee from: 
I 
The Central Government or any State Government; 
II 
Any bank including a co-operative bank; 
III 
The Life Insurance Corporation; 
IV 
The National Housing Bank; 
V 
Any public company formed and registered in India with the main 
object of carrying on the business of providing long-term finance 
for construction or purchase of houses in India for residential 
purposes which is eligible for deduction under section 36(1)(viii); 
VI 
Any company in which the public are substantially interested or 
any cooperative society engaged in the business of financing the 
construction of houses; 
VII 
The assessee’s employer, where such employer is an authority or 
a board or a corporation or any other body established or 
constituted under a Central or State Act; 
VIII 
the assessee’s employer where such employer is a public company 
or public sector company or a university established by law or a 
college affiliated to such university or a local authority or a co-
operative society. 
(d) 
Stamp duty, registration fee and other expenses for the purposes of 
transfer of such house property to the assessee. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.17 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
Inadmissible payments: However, the following amounts do not qualify for 
rebate: 
(A) 
admission fee, cost of share and initial deposit which a shareholder of 
a company or a member of a co-operative society has to pay for 
becoming a shareholder or member; or 
(B) 
the cost of any addition or alteration or renovation or repair of the 
house property after the issue of the completion certificate in respect 
of the house property or after the house has been occupied by the 
assessee or any person on his behalf or after it has been let out; or 
(C) 
any expenditure in respect of which deduction is allowable under 
section 24. 
(17) Subscription to certain equity shares or debentures 
 
Subscription to equity shares or debentures forming part of any eligible issue 
of capital approved by the Board on an application made by a public company 
or as subscription to any eligible issue of capital by any public financial 
institution in the prescribed form. 
A lock-in period of three years is provided in respect of such equity shares or 
debentures.  In case of any sale or transfer of shares or debentures within 
three years of the date of acquisition, the aggregate amount of deductions 
allowed in respect of such equity shares or debentures in the previous year 
or years preceding the previous year in which such sale or transfer has taken 
place shall be deemed to be the income of the assessee of such previous year 
and shall be liable to tax in the assessment year relevant to such previous 
year.  
 
A person shall be treated as having acquired any shares or debentures on the 
date on which his name is entered in relation to those shares or debentures 
in the register of members or of debenture-holders, as the case may be, of 
the public company. 
(18) Subscription to certain units of mutual fund 
 
Subscription to any units of any mutual fund and approved by the Board on 
an application made by such mutual fund in the prescribed form. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.18 
It is necessary that such units should be subscribed only in the eligible issue 
of capital of any company. 
(19) Investment in five year term deposit 
 
Investment in term deposit 
(i) 
for a period of not less than five years with a scheduled bank; and 
(ii) 
which is in accordance with a scheme framed and notified by the Central 
Government in the Official Gazette 
 
qualifies as an eligible investment for availing deduction under section 80C. 
The maximum limit for investment in term deposit is ` 1,50,000. 
Scheduled bank means - 
(1) 
the State Bank of India (SBI)  
(2) 
a subsidiary bank of SBI, or 
(3) 
a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act 
(4) 
any other bank, being a bank included in the Second Schedule to the 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Act, 1934. 
(20) Subscription to notified bonds issued by NABARD 
 
Subscription to such bonds issued by NABARD (as the Central Government 
may notify in the Official Gazette) qualifies for deduction under section 80C. 
(21) Investment in five year Post Office time deposit 
 
Investment in five year time deposit in an account under Post Office Time 
Deposit Rules, 1981 qualifies for deduction under section 80C. 
(22) Deposit in Senior Citizens Savings Scheme Rules, 2004 
 
Deposit in an account under the Senior Citizens Savings Scheme Rules, 2004 
qualifies for deduction under section 80C. 
(23) Contribution to additional account under NPS 
 
Contribution by a Central Government employee to additional account under 
NPS (specified account) referred to in section 80CCD for a fixed period of not 
less than 3 years and which is in accordance with the scheme notified by the 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.19 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
Central Government for this purpose qualifies for deduction under section 
80C. It may be noted that only the contribution to the additional account 
under NPS will qualify for deduction under section 80C.   
There are two types of NPS account i.e., Tier I and Tier II, to which an individual 
can contribute. Section 80CCD provides deduction in respect of contribution 
to individual pension account [Tier I account] under the NPS [referred to in 
section 20(2)(a) of the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority 
Act, 2013 (PFRDA)] whereas deduction under section 80C is allowable in 
respect of contribution by Central Government employee to additional 
account [Tier II account] of NPS [referred to in section 20(3) of the PFRDA], 
which does not qualify for deduction under section 80CCD. Thus, Tier II 
account is the additional account under NPS, contribution to which 
would qualify for deduction under section 80C only in the hands of a 
Central Government employee. 
(ii) 
Termination of Insurance Policy or Unit Linked Insurance Plan or transfer 
of House Property or withdrawal of deposit: 
 
Where, in any previous year, an assessee: 
(i) 
terminates his contract of insurance referred to in (3) above, by notice 
to that effect or where the contract ceases to be in force by reason of 
not paying the premium, by not reviving the contract of insurance, - 
(a) 
in case of any single premium policy, within two years after the 
date of commencement of insurance; or 
(b) 
in any other case, before premiums have been paid for two years; 
or 
(ii) 
terminates his participation in any Unit Linked Insurance Plan referred 
to in (1) or (2) above, by notice to that effect or where he ceases to 
participate by reason of failure to pay any contribution, by not reviving 
his participation, before contributions in respect of such participation 
have been paid for five years, or 
(iii) 
transfers the house property referred to in (16) above, before the expiry 
of five years from the end of the financial year in which possession of 
such property is obtained by him, or receives back, whether by way of 
refund or otherwise, any sum specified in (16) above,  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.20 
then, no deduction will be allowed to the assessee in respect of sums paid 
during such previous year and the total amount of deductions of income 
allowed in respect of the previous year or years preceding such previous year, 
shall be deemed to be income of the assessee of such previous year and shall 
be liable to tax in the assessment year relevant to such previous year. 
Further, where any amount is withdrawn by the assessee from his account 
under the Senior Citizens Savings Scheme or under the Post Office Time 
Deposit Rules before the expiry of a period of 5 years from the date of its 
deposit, the amount so withdrawn shall be deemed to be the income of the 
assessee of the previous year in which the amount is withdrawn. Accordingly, 
the amount so withdrawn would be chargeable to tax in the assessment year 
relevant to such previous year. The amount chargeable to tax would also 
include that part of the amount withdrawn which represents interest accrued 
on the deposit.    
However, if any part of the amount relating to interest so received or 
withdrawn has been subject to tax in any of the earlier years, such amount 
shall not be taxed again. 
If any amount has been received by the nominee or legal heir of the assessee, 
on the death of such assessee, the amount would not be chargeable to tax.  
However, if the amount relating to interest on deposit was not included in the 
total income of the assessee in any of any earlier years, then, such interest would 
be chargeable to tax. 
Summary of investment/ contributions eligible for deduction u/s 80C 
S. No. 
Investment/ contributions 
(i) 
Contribution in Unit-linked Insurance Plan 1971 
In case of individual – in the name of individual, his or her spouse 
or any child of the individual
In case of HUF – in the name of any member of HUF 
(ii) 
Contribution in Unit-linked Insurance Plan of LIC Mutual Fund
In case of individual – In the name of individual, his or her spouse 
or any child of the individual 
In case of HUF – In the name of any member of HUF 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

6.21 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
(iii) 
Premium paid in respect of Life Insurance policy 
In case of individual – on the life of individual, his or her spouse 
or any child of the individual 
In case of HUF – on the life of any member of HUF 
(iv) 
Premium paid in respect of a contract for deferred annuity 
In case of individual – on the life of individual, his or her spouse 
or any child of the individual 
(v) 
Any sum deducted from the salary payable of a Government 
employee for securing a deferred annuity [excess over 1/5th of the 
salary to be ignored] 
(vi) 
Contribution to PPF 
In case of individual – in the name of Individual, his or her spouse 
or any child of the individual 
In case of HUF – In the name of any member of HUF 
(vii)
Contribution to SPF/RPF 
(viii) 
Contribution to approved superannuation Fund 
(ix) 
Paid or deposited in Sukanya Samriddhi Account
(a)
for any girl child of the individual; or
(b) for any girl child for whom such individual is the legal guardian
(x)
Subscription to National Savings Certificates VIII 
(xi) 
Contribution to approved annuity plan of LIC or any other notified 
insurer 
(xii) 
Subscription towards notified units of mutual fund or UTI [ELSS] 
(xiii) 
Contribution to notified pension fund set up by mutual fund or UTI 
(xiv) 
Contribution to National Housing Bank (Tax Saving) Term Deposit 
Scheme, 2008 
(xv) 
Subscription to notified deposit scheme of public sector co. or 
authority constituted in India in relation to housing. For example, 
public deposit scheme of HUDCO. 
(xvi) 
Tuition fees to by an individual to any university, college, school or 
other educational institution within India for full-time education for 
maximum 2 children of the individual. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.22 
(xvii) 
Repayment of housing loan for purchase/ construction of house 
property including stamp duty, registration fee and other expenses 
for transfer
(xviii) 
Subscription to certain equity shares or debentures forming part of 
any approved eligible issue of capital by a public company or by 
any public financial institution 
(xix) 
Units of mutual fund subscribed only in eligible issue of capital of 
any company 
(xx) 
Investment in five year term deposit with a scheduled bank 
(xxi) 
Subscription to notified bonds issued by NABARD 
(xxii) 
Investment in five year Post Office time deposit 
(xxiii) 
Deposit in Senior Citizens Savings Scheme Rules, 2004 
(xxiv) 
Contribution to additional account under NPS (Tier II account), in 
case of Central Government employee 
2.2  Deduction in respect of contribution to certain pension 
funds [Section 80CCC] 
 
[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of 
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)] 
(i) 
Eligible assessee: Where an assessee, being an individual, has in the previous 
year paid or deposited any amount out of his income chargeable to tax to effect 
or keep in force a contract for any annuity plan of LIC of India or any other 
insurer for receiving pension from the fund set up by LIC or such other insurer, 
he shall be allowed a deduction in the computation of his total income. 
 
For this purpose, the interest or bonus accrued or credited to the assessee’s 
account shall not be reckoned as contribution. 
 
Note: Where any amount paid or deposited by the assessee has been taken 
into account for the purposes of this section, a deduction under section 80C 
shall not be allowed with reference to such amount. 
(ii) 
Maximum Deduction: The maximum permissible deduction is ` 1,50,000 
(Further, the overall limit of ` 1,50,000 prescribed in section 80CCE will 
continue to be applicable i.e. the maximum permissible deduction under 
sections 80C, 80CCC and 80CCD(1) put together is ` 1,50,000).  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.23 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
(iii) Deemed Income: Where any amount standing to the credit of the assessee 
in the fund in respect of which a deduction has been allowed, together with 
interest or bonus accrued or credited to the assessee’s account is received by 
the assessee or his nominee on account of the surrender of the annuity plan 
in any previous year or as pension received from the annuity plan, such 
amount will be deemed to be the income of the assessee or the nominee in 
that previous year in which such withdrawal is made or pension is received. It 
will be chargeable to tax as income of that previous year. 
2.3  Deduction in respect of contribution to pension scheme 
notified by the Central Government [Section 80CCD] 
(i) 
Pension Scheme of Central Government: It is mandatory for persons 
entering the service of the Central Government on or after 1st January, 2004, 
to contribute 10% of their salary every month towards their pension account. 
A matching contribution is required to be made by the Government to the 
said account. The benefit of this scheme is also available to individuals 
employed by any other employer as well as to self-employed individuals. 
(ii) 
Deduction: Section 80CCD provides deduction in respect of contribution 
made to the pension scheme notified by the Central Government.  
 
Accordingly, the Central Government has notified the ‘Atal Pension Yojana 
(APY)’ as a pension scheme, contribution to which would qualify for deduction 
under section 80CCD in the hands of the individual. 
(iii) Quantum of deduction:  
(a) 
Section 80CCD(1) provides a deduction for the amount paid or 
deposited by an employee in his pension account subject to a maximum 
of 10% of his salary. The deduction in the case of a self-employed 
individual would be restricted to 20% of his gross total income in the 
previous year. 
Deduction u/s 80CCD(1) would be available to an assessee 
only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default 
tax regime u/s 115BAC(1A) (i.e., if he pays tax under the 
optional tax regime – the normal provisions of the Act).  
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.24 
Deduction under section 80CCD(1) 
(b) 
Section 80CCD(1B) provides for an additional deduction of up to  
` 50,000 in respect of the whole of the amount paid or deposited by an 
individual assessee under NPS in the previous year, whether or not any 
deduction is allowed u/s 80CCD(1). 
Deduction u/s 80CCD(1B) would be available to an 
assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of 
the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A) (i.e., it is 
available only if the assessee pays tax under the optional tax regime – 
normal provisions of the Act) 
(c) 
Whereas the deduction under section 80CCD(1) is subject to the overall 
limit of ` 1.50 lakh under section 80CCE (i.e., the maximum permissible 
deduction under sections 80C, 80CCC and 80CCD(1) put together), the 
deduction of upto ` 50,000 under section 80CCD(1B) is in addition to 
the overall limit of ` 1.50 lakh provided under section 80CCE.  
(d) 
Under section 80CCD(2), contribution made by the Central Government 
or State Government or any other employer in the previous year to the 
said account of an employee, is allowed as a deduction in computation 
of the total income of the assessee. 
(e) 
The entire employer’s contribution would be included in the salary of 
the employee. However, deduction under section 80CCD(2) would be 
restricted to 14% of salary, in case of contribution made by the Central 
Eligible 
Assessee 
An individual 
employed by CG 
on or after 
01.01.2004 
An Individual 
employed by any 
other employer 
Any other 
individual 
10% of 
salary 
20% of GTI 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.25 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
Government or State Government, and to 10% of salary, in case of 
contribution made by any other employer. 
Deduction u/s 80CCD(2) would be available to an assessee 
irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax. 
1. The limit of ` 1,50,000 under section 80CCE does not apply 
to employer’s contribution to pension scheme of Central Government 
which is allowable as deduction under section 80CCD(2).  
2. 
No deduction will be allowed under section 80C in respect of 
amounts paid or deposited by the assessee, for which deduction has 
been allowed under section 80CCD(1) or under section 80CCD(1B). 
(iv) Deemed Income: The amount standing to the credit of the assessee in the 
pension account (for which deduction has already been claimed by him under 
this section) and accretions to such account, shall be taxed as income in the 
year in which such amounts are received by the assessee or his nominee on - 
(a) 
closure of the account or  
(b) 
his opting out of the said scheme or  
(c) 
receipt of pension from the annuity plan purchased or taken on such closure 
or opting out. 
 
However, the amount received by the nominee on the death of the assessee 
under the circumstances referred to in (a) and (b) above, shall not be deemed 
to be the income of the nominee.  
 
Further, the assessee shall be deemed not to have received any amount in 
the previous year if such amount is used for purchasing an annuity plan in 
the same previous year. 
1.
Exemption on payment from NPS Trust to an assessee on closure 
of his account or on his opting out of the pension scheme  
[Section 10(12A)] 
(i) 
As per section 80CCD, any payment from National Pension 
System Trust to an assessee on account of closure or his opting 
out of the pension scheme is chargeable to tax. 
(ii) 
Section 10(12A) provides that any payment from National 
Pension System Trust to an assessee on account of closure or 
his opting out of the pension scheme referred to in section 
80CCD, to the extent it does not exceed 60% of the total 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.26 
amount payable to him at the time of closure or his opting out 
of the scheme, shall be exempt from tax. 
2.  
Exemption on payment from NPS Trust to an employee on 
partial withdrawal [Section 10(12B)] 
 
To provide relief to an employee subscriber of NPS, section 10(12B) 
provides that any payment from National Pension System Trust to 
an employee under the pension scheme referred to in section 
80CCD, on partial withdrawn made out of his account in accordance 
with the terms and conditions specified under the Pension Fund 
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 2013 and the 
regulations made there under, shall be exempt from tax to the extent 
it does not exceed 25% of amount of contributions made by him. 
2.4 Limit on deductions under sections 80C, 80CCC & 
80CCD(1) [Section 80CCE] 
This section restricts the aggregate amount of deduction under section 80C, 80CCC 
and 80CCD(1) to ` 1,50,000. It may be noted that the deduction of upto  
` 50,000 under section 80CCD(1B) and employer’s contribution to pension scheme, 
allowable as deduction under section 80CCD(2) in the hands of the employee, 
would be outside the overall limit of ` 1,50,000 stipulated under section 80CCE. 
The following table summarizes the ceiling limit under these sections – 
Section 
Particulars 
Ceiling limit (`) 
80C
Investment in LIP, Deposit in PPF/SPF/RPF etc.
1,50,000
80CCC
Contribution to certain pension funds 
1,50,000 
80CCD(1) 
Contribution to NPS of Government  
10% of salary Or 
20% of GTI, as 
the case may be. 
80CCE 
Aggregate deduction under sections 80C, 
80CCC & 80CCD(1) 
1,50,000 
80CCD(1B) Contribution to NPS notified by the Central 
Government (outside the limit of ` 1,50,000 
under section 80CCE) 
50,000 
80CCD(2) 
Contribution by the Central Government or 
14% of salary 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.27 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
State Government to NPS A/c of its employees 
(outside the limit of ` 1,50,000 under section 
80CCE) 
 
Contribution by any other employer to NPS 
A/c of its employees (outside the limit of 
` 1,50,000 under section 80CCE) 
10% of salary 
For computation of limit under section 80CCD(1) and 80CCD(2), 
salary includes dearness allowance, if the terms of employment so 
provide, but excludes all other allowances and perquisites.  
ILLUSTRATION 5 
The basic salary of Mr. A is ` 1,00,000 p.m. He is entitled to dearness allowance, which 
is 40% of basic salary. 50% of dearness allowance forms part of pay for retirement 
benefits.  Both Mr. A and his employer, ABC Ltd., contribute 15% of basic salary to 
the pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD. Explain the tax treatment in respect 
of such contribution in the hands of Mr. A if he has exercised the option of shifting 
out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). 
What would be your answer if Mr. A pays tax under the default tax regime under 
section 115BAC? 
SOLUTION
(i) 
Tax treatment in the hands of Mr. A in respect of employer’s and own 
contribution to pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD, where  
Mr. A has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime 
provided under section 115BAC(1A) [i.e., where Mr. A pays tax under the 
normal provisions of the Act]  
(a) 
Employer’s contribution to such pension scheme would be treated as 
salary since it is specifically included in the definition of “salary” under 
section 17(1)(viii). Therefore, ` 1,80,000, being 15% of basic salary of  
` 12,00,000, will be included in Mr. A’s salary. 
(b) 
Mr. A’s contribution to pension scheme is allowable as deduction under 
section 80CCD(1). However, the deduction is restricted to 10% of salary. 
Salary, for this purpose, means basic pay plus dearness allowance, if it 
forms part of pay. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.28 
 
Therefore, “salary” for the purpose of deduction under section 80CCD 
for Mr. A would be – 
Particulars 
` 
Basic salary = ` 1,00,000 × 12 = 
 
12,00,000 
Dearness allowance = 40% of ` 12,00,000 = ` 4,80,000 
 
50% of Dearness Allowance forms part of pay = 50% of  
` 4,80,000 
2,40,000 
Salary for the purpose of deduction under section 
80CCD 
14,40,000 
Deduction under section 80CCD(1) is restricted to 10% 
of ` 14,40,000 (as against actual contribution of  
` 1,80,000, being 15% of basic salary of ` 12,00,000) 
1,44,000 
As per section 80CCD(1B), a further deduction of upto  
` 50,000 is allowable. Therefore, deduction under section 
80CCD(1B) is ` 36,000 (` 1,80,000 - ` 1,44,000). 
36,000 
 
` 1,44,000 is allowable as deduction under section 80CCD(1). This would 
be taken into consideration and be subject to the overall limit of  
` 1,50,000 under section 80CCE. ` 36,000 allowable as deduction under 
section 80CCD(1B) is outside the overall limit of ` 1,50,000 under 
section 80CCE.  
 
In the alternative, ` 50,000 can be claimed as deduction under section 
80CCD(1B).  The balance ` 1,30,000 (` 1,80,000- ` 50,000) can be 
claimed as deduction under section 80CCD(1). 
(c) 
Employer’s contribution to pension scheme would be allowable as 
deduction under section 80CCD(2), subject to a maximum of 10% of 
salary. Therefore, deduction under section 80CCD(2), would also be 
restricted to ` 1,44,000, even though the entire employer’s contribution 
of ` 1,80,000 is included in salary under section 17(1)(viii). However, this 
deduction of employer’s contribution of ` 1,44,000 to pension scheme 
would be outside the overall limit of ` 1,50,000 under section 80CCE i.e., 
this deduction would be over and above the other deductions which 
are subject to the limit of ` 1,50,000. 
(ii) 
Where Mr. A pays tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC  
Mr. A would not be eligible for deduction under section 80CCD(1)/(1B) in respect 
of his contribution to pension scheme under the default tax regime under 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.29 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
section 115BAC. However, he would be allowed deduction of ` 1,44,000 under 
section 80CCD(2) in respect of employer’s contribution to pension scheme. 
ILLUSTRATION 6 
The gross total income of Mr. X for the A.Y.2024-25 is ` 8,00,000.  He has made the 
following investments/payments during the F.Y.2023-24 – 
Particulars 
` 
(1) Contribution to PPF 
1,10,000 
(2) Payment of tuition fees to Apeejay School, New Delhi, for 
education of his son studying in Class XI 
45,000 
(3) Repayment of housing loan taken from Standard Chartered Bank 
25,000 
(4) Contribution to approved pension fund of LIC 
1,05,000 
Compute the eligible deduction under Chapter VI-A for the A.Y.2024-25 if Mr. X 
exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 
115BAC(1A). 
SOLUTION 
Computation of deduction under Chapter VI-A for the A.Y.2024-25 
Particulars 
` 
Deduction under section 80C 
 
- 
Contribution to PPF 
1,10,000 
- 
Payment of tuition fees to Apeejay School, New Delhi, for 
education of his son studying in Class XI 
 
45,000 
- 
Repayment of housing loan  
  25,000 
 
 
1,80,000 
Restricted to ` 1,50,000, being the maximum permissible deduction 
u/s 80C 
1,50,000 
Deduction under section 80CCC 
 
- 
Contribution to approved pension fund of LIC 
1,05,000 
 
 
2,55,000 
As per section 80CCE, the aggregate deduction under section 80C, 
80CCC and 80CCD(1) has to be restricted to ` 1,50,000 
 
Deduction allowable under Chapter VIA for the A.Y. 2024-25 
1,50,000 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.30 
2.5  Deduction in respect of contribution to Agnipath Scheme 
[Section 80CCH] 
(i) 
Meaning of Agnipath scheme: Agnipath scheme is a Central Government 
scheme launched in 2022 for enrolment of Indian youth in the Indian Armed 
Forces. 
(ii) 
Meaning of Agniveer Corpus Fund: The Agniveer Corpus Fund means a fund 
in which consolidated contributions of all the Agniveers and matching 
contributions of the Central Government along with interest on both these 
contributions are held. 
(iii) Features of the Agnipath Scheme: Each Agniveer is to contribute 30% of his 
monthly customized Agniveer Package to the individual’s Agniveer Corpus 
Fund. Further, the Government will also contribute a matching amount to the 
‘Agniveer Corpus Fund’. The Government will also pay to the subscriber interest 
as approved from time to time on the contributions standing in his account. 
(iv) Deduction: Section 80CCH provides deduction in respect of contribution made 
in the Agniveer Corpus Fund by the individual enrolled in the Agnipath Scheme 
and the Central Government.  
(v) 
Quantum of deduction:  
(a)
Section 80CCH(1) provides a deduction for the amount paid or deposited 
by an assessee, being an individual enrolled in the Agnipath Scheme and 
subscribing to the Agniveer Corpus Fund on or after 1.11.2022, in his 
account in the Agniveer Corpus Fund.  
Deduction u/s 80CCH(1) would be available to an 
individual only if he has exercised the option of shifting out 
of the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A). 
(b) 
Under section 80CCH(2), the whole amount of contribution made by the 
Central Government to the said account of an assessee in the Agniveer 
Corpus Fund, is allowed as a deduction in computation of the total 
income of the assessee. 
(e) 
The entire Central Government’s contribution to the Agniveer Corpus 
Fund would be included in the salary of the assessee. However, deduction 
under section 80CCH(2) would be available for the same. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.31 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
Deduction u/s 80CCH(2) would be available to an individual 
irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax. 
 
Exemption on payment from Agnipath Corpus Fund to a person enrolled under 
the Agnipath Scheme or to his nominee [Section 10(12C)] 
Any payment from the Agnipath Corpus Fund to a person enrolled under the 
Agnipath Scheme or to his nominee would be exempt from tax.  
2.6 Deduction in respect of medical insurance premium 
[Section 80D] 
 
[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out 
of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)] 
1. 
In case of an Individual 
(i) 
Deduction in respect of insurance premium paid for family: A deduction 
to the extent of ` 25,000 is allowed in respect of the following payments – 
(1) 
premium paid to effect or to keep in force an insurance on the health 
of self, spouse and dependent children or 
(2) 
any contribution made to the Central Government Health Scheme or  
(3) 
such other health scheme as may be notified by the Central 
Government. Contributory Health Service Scheme of the Department of 
Space has been notified by the Central Government. 
(ii) 
Deduction in respect of insurance premium for parents: A further 
deduction up to ` 25,000 is allowable to effect or to keep in force an insurance 
on the health of parents of the assessee. 
Quantum of deduction in case of senior citizen: An increased 
deduction of ` 50,000 (instead of ` 25,000) shall be allowed in 
case any of the persons mentioned above is a senior citizen i.e., 
an individual resident in India of the age of 60 years or more at any time 
during the relevant previous year. 
(iii) Deduction in respect of payment towards preventive health check-up: 
Section 80D provides that deduction to the extent of ` 5,000 shall be allowed 
in respect payment made on account of preventive health check-up of self, 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.32 
spouse, dependent children or parents during the previous year. However, 
the said deduction of ` 5,000 is within the overall limit of ` 25,000 or ` 50,000, 
specified in (i) and (ii) above.  
(iv) Mode of payment: For claiming deduction under section 80D, the payment 
can be made: 
(1) 
by any mode, including cash, in respect of any sum paid on account of 
preventive health check-up; 
(2) 
by any mode other than cash, in all other cases. 
(v) 
Deduction for medical expenditure incurred on senior citizens: As a 
welfare measure towards senior citizens i.e., person of the age of 60 years 
or more and resident in India, who are unable to get health insurance 
coverage, deduction of upto ` 50,000 would be allowed in respect of any 
payment made on account of medical expenditure in respect of a such 
person(s), if no payment has been made to keep in force an insurance on the 
health of such person(s). 
2. 
In case of a HUF 
Deduction under section 80D is allowable in respect of premium paid to 
insure the health of any member of the family. The maximum deduction 
available to a HUF would be ` 25,000 and in case any member is a senior 
citizen, ` 50,000.   
Further, the amount paid on account of medical expenditure incurred on the 
health of any member(s) of a family who is a resident senior citizen would qualify 
for deduction subject to a maximum of ` 50,000 provided no amount has been 
paid to effect or keep in force any insurance on the health of such person(s). 
3. 
Other conditions 
 
The other conditions to be fulfilled are that such premium should be paid by 
any mode, other than cash, in the previous year out of his income chargeable 
to tax.  Further, the medical insurance should be in accordance with a scheme 
made in this behalf by - 
(a) 
the General Insurance Corporation of India and approved by the Central 
Government in this behalf; or 
(b) 
any other insurer and approved by the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.33 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
The following table summarizes the provisions of section 80D – 
S. 
No. 
Nature of payment/ 
expenditure 
Expenditure on behalf of
Deduction
I 
(i) Any premium paid, 
otherwise than by way 
of cash, to keep in 
force an insurance on 
the health  
(ii) Contribution 
 
 
to 
Central 
Government 
Health 
Scheme 
(CGHS) 
(iii) Preventive 
health 
check up expenditure 
 
In case of 
individual  
Self, spouse and 
dependent 
children 
In case of 
HUF 
Family member 
 
 
` 25,000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
` 50,000 
 
 
 
II 
(i) Any 
premium 
paid, 
otherwise than by way 
of cash, to keep in force 
an insura-nce on the 
health  
(ii) Preventive health check 
up 
Parents 
 
` 25,000 
 
 
 
` 50,000 
 
 
 
 
III 
Amount paid on account 
of medical expenditure 
For self/spouse/parents + who 
is of the age of 60 years or more 
+ Resident in India + no 
payment has been made to 
keep in force an insurance on 
the health of such person 
 
` 50,000 
Note: In case the individual or any of his family members is a senior citizen, the 
aggregate of deduction, in respect of payment of premium, contribution to CGHS 
In case either or both the 
parents is of the age of 60 years 
or more + Resident in India
In case any of the above 
persons is of the age of 60 years 
or more + resident in India
Maximum ` 5,000 allowed as deduction for aggregate of preventive 
health check-up expenditure, by any mode including cash, mentioned 
in I and II (Subject to overall limit of ` 25,000 or ` 50,000, as the case 
may be)
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.34 
and medical expenditure incurred, as specified in (I) & (III) above, cannot exceed 
` 50,000. 
In case one of the parents is a senior citizen who is covered under mediclaim policy
and another is also a senior citizen but not covered under mediclaim policy, the 
aggregate of deduction, in respect of payment of medical insurance premium and 
medical expenditure incurred, as specified in (II) & (III) above, cannot exceed  
` 50,000. 
4. 
Deduction where premium for health insurance is paid in lump sum 
[Section 80D(4A)] 
(i) 
Appropriate fraction of lump sum premium allowable as deduction: 
In a case where mediclaim premium is paid in lumpsum for more than 
one year by: 
(a) 
an individual, to effect or keep in force an insurance on his health 
or health of his spouse, dependent children or parents; or 
(b) 
a HUF, to effect or keep in force an insurance on the health of any 
member of the family,   
 
then, the deduction allowable under this section for each of the relevant 
previous year would be equal to the appropriate fraction of such lump 
sum payment. 
(ii) 
Meaning of certain terms 
Term
Meaning
Appropriate 
fraction 
1 ÷ Total number of relevant previous years 
Relevant 
previous year 
The previous year in which such lump sum amount 
is paid; and the subsequent previous year(s) during 
which the insurance would be in force. 
ILLUSTRATION 7 
Mr. A, aged 40 years, paid medical insurance premium of ` 20,000 during the  
P.Y. 2023-24 to insure his health as well as the health of his spouse. He also paid 
medical insurance premium of ` 47,000 during the year to insure the health of his 
father, aged 63 years, who is not dependent on him. He contributed ` 3,600 to Central 
Government Health Scheme during the year. He has incurred ` 3,000 in cash on 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.35 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
preventive health check-up of himself and his spouse and ` 4,000 by cheque on 
preventive health check-up of his father. Compute the deduction allowable under 
section 80D for the A.Y. 2024-25 if Mr. A has exercised the option of shifting out of 
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). 
SOLUTION 
Deduction allowable under section 80D for the A.Y.2024-25 
 
 
Particulars 
Actual 
Payment 
` 
Maximum 
deduction 
allowable ` 
A. Premium 
paid 
and 
medical 
expenditure 
incurred for self and spouse 
 
 
(i) 
Medical insurance premium paid for self and 
spouse  
20,000 
20,000 
(ii) Contribution to CGHS 
3,600 
3,600 
(iii) Exp. on preventive health check-up of self & spouse 
3,000 
1,400 
 
 
26,600 
25,000 
B. 
Premium paid or medical expenditure incurred 
for father, who is a senior citizen 
 
 
(i) 
Mediclaim premium paid for father, who is over 
60 years of age          
47,000 
47,000 
(ii) Expenditure on preventive health check-up of 
father  
4,000 
3,000 
 
 
51,000 
50,000 
 
Total deduction under section 80D (` 25,000 + 
` 50,000) 
 
75,000 
Notes: 
(1) 
The total deduction under A. (i), (ii) and (iii) above should not exceed ` 25,000.  
Therefore, the expenditure on preventive health check-up for self and spouse 
would be restricted to ` 1,400, being (` 25,000 – ` 20,000 – ` 3,600). 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.36 
(2) 
The total deduction under B. (i) and (ii) above should not exceed ` 50,000. 
Therefore, the expenditure on preventive health check-up for father would be 
restricted to ` 3,000, being (` 50,000 – ` 47,000). 
(3) 
In this case, the total deduction allowed on account of expenditure on 
preventive health check-up of self, spouse and father is ` 4,400 (i.e., ` 1,400 
+ ` 3,000), which is within the maximum permissible limit of ` 5,000. 
ILLUSTRATION 8 
Mr. Y, aged 40 years, paid medical insurance premium of ` 22,000 during the 
P.Y. 2023-24 to insure his health as well as the health of his spouse and dependent 
children. He also paid medical insurance premium of ` 33,000 during the year to insure 
the health of his mother, aged 67 years, who is not dependent on him. He incurred 
medical expenditure of ` 20,000 on his father, aged 71 years, who is not covered under 
mediclaim policy. His father is also not dependent upon him. He contributed ` 6,000 to 
Central Government Health Scheme during the year.  Compute the deduction 
allowable under section 80D for the A.Y. 2024-25 if Mr. Y has exercised the option of 
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). 
SOLUTION 
Deduction allowable under section 80D for the A.Y.2024-25 
 
Particulars 
` 
` 
(i)
Medical insurance premium paid for self, spouse and 
dependent children  
 
22,000 
(ii) 
Contribution to CGHS 
  6,000 
 
 
 
28,000 
 
 
restricted to  
 
25,000 
(iii) Mediclaim premium paid for mother, who is over 60 
years of age 
 
33,000 
 
(iv) Medical expenditure incurred for father, who is over 
60 years of age and not covered by any insurance  
 
 20,000 
 
 
 
53,000 
 
 
restricted to 
 
50,000 
 
 
75,000 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.37 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
2.7 Deduction in respect of maintenance including medical 
treatment of a dependant disabled [Section 80DD] 
[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out 
of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)] 
(i) 
Eligible assessee: Section 80DD provides deduction to an assessee, who is a 
resident in India, being an individual or Hindu undivided family.  
(ii) 
Payments qualifying for deduction:  
(a) 
Any amount – 
- 
incurred for the medical treatment (including nursing), training 
and rehabilitation of a dependant, being a person with disability, 
or  
- 
paid or deposited under a scheme framed in this behalf by the 
Life Insurance Corporation or any other insurer or the 
Administrator or the Specified Company2 for the maintenance of 
a dependant, being a person with disability 
 
qualifies for deduction. 
(b) 
The benefit of deduction under this section is also available to assessees 
incurring expenditure on maintenance including medical treatment of 
persons suffering from autism, cerebral palsy and multiple disabilities. 
(iii) Quantum of deduction: The quantum of deduction is ` 75,000 and in case 
of severe disability (i.e., person with 80% or more disability) the deduction 
shall be ` 1,25,000.  
(iv) Conditions:  
(a) 
The scheme should provide for payment of annuity or a lump sum 
amount for the benefit of a dependant, being a person with disability,  
I  
in the event of the death of the individual or member of the HUF, 
in whose name subscription was made; or 
2 as referred to in section 2(h) of the Unit Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2002,
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.38 
II 
on attaining the age of 60 years or more by such individual or the 
member of the HUF, and the payment or deposit to such scheme 
has been discontinued 
and the assessee must nominate either the dependant, being a person 
with disability or any other person or a trust to receive the payment on 
his behalf, for the benefit of the dependant, being a person with 
disability. 
(b) 
For claiming the deduction, the assessee have to furnish a copy of the 
certificate issued by the medical authority under the Persons with 
Disability (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full 
Participation) Act, 1995 along with the return of income under  
section 139.  
(c) 
Where the condition of disability requires reassessment, a fresh 
certificate from the medical authority shall have to be obtained after 
the expiry of the period mentioned in the original certificate in order to 
continue to claim the deduction. 
(v) 
Deemed income:  
If the dependent, being a person with disability, predeceases the individual 
or the member of HUF, in whose name subscription was made, then, the 
amount paid or deposited under the said scheme would be the deemed 
income and chargeable to tax in the hands of the assessee (individual or 
member of HUF) in the previous year in which such amount is received by 
him. 
However, such deeming provisions would not apply, to the amount received 
by the dependent, being a person with disability, before his death, by way of 
annuity or lump sum under the scheme mentioned in II of (a) above i.e., when 
the individual or member of HUF attains the age of 60 years or more, and the 
payment or deposit to such scheme has been discontinued. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.39 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
(vi)  Meaning of “Dependent”: 
Assessee
Dependant
(1) Individual 
the spouse, children, parents, brother or sister of the 
individual who is wholly or mainly dependant on such 
individual and not claimed deduction under section 80U in 
the computation of his income 
(2) HUF 
a member of the HUF, wholly or mainly dependant on 
such HUF and not claimed deduction under section 80U 
in the computation of his income 
ILLUSTRATION 9 
Mr. X is a resident individual. He deposits a sum of ` 50,000 with Life Insurance 
Corporation every year for the maintenance of his disabled grandfather who is wholly 
dependent upon him. The disability is one which comes under the Persons with 
Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 
1995. A copy of the certificate from the medical authority is submitted. Compute the 
amount of deduction available under section 80DD for the A.Y. 2024-25, if Mr. X has 
exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 
115BAC(1A).  
SOLUTION 
Since the amount deposited by Mr. X was for his grandfather, he will not be allowed 
any deduction under section 80DD. The deduction is available if the individual 
assessee incurs any expense for a “dependant” disabled person. Grandfather does 
not come within the meaning of “dependant” as defined under section 80DD. 
ILLUSTRATION 10 
What will be the deduction if Mr. X had made this deposit for his dependant father?
SOLUTION 
Since the expense was incurred for a dependant disabled person, Mr. X will be 
entitled to claim a deduction of ` 75,000 under section 80DD, irrespective of the 
amount deposited. In case his father has severe disability, the deduction would be 
` 1,25,000. 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.40 
2.8  Deduction 
in 
respect 
of 
medical 
treatment 
etc.  
[Section 80DDB] 
 
[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out 
of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
(i) 
Eligible assessee: This section provides deduction to an assessee, who is 
resident in India, being an individual and Hindu undivided family. The 
deduction is available to an individual for medical expenditure incurred on 
himself or a dependant. It is also available to a Hindu undivided family (HUF) 
for such expenditure incurred on any of its members.  
(ii) 
Meaning of “Dependent”: 
 
Assessee 
Dependent 
(1) Individual the spouse, children, parents, brother or sister of the 
individual or any of them, wholly or mainly dependant on 
such individual for his support and maintenance. 
(2) HUF
a member of the HUF, wholly or mainly dependant on 
such HUF for his support and maintenance. 
(iii) Payment qualifying for deduction: Any amount actually paid for the 
medical treatment of such disease or ailment as may be specified by the 
Board for himself or a dependant, in case the assessee is an individual, or for 
any member of a HUF, in case the assessee is a HUF, will qualify for deduction.
(iv) Quantum of deduction: The amount of deduction under this section shall be 
equal to the amount actually paid or ` 40,000, whichever is less, in respect 
of that previous year in which such amount was actually paid.  
In case the amount is paid in respect of a senior citizen, i.e., a resident 
individual of the age of 60 years or more at any time during the relevant 
previous year, then the deduction would be the amount actually paid or  
` 1,00,000, whichever is less.  
The deduction under this section shall be reduced by the amount received, if 
any, under an insurance from an insurer, or reimbursed by an employer, for 
the medical treatment of the assessee or the dependant. 
(v) 
Maximum deduction: The maximum limit of deduction under section 80DDB 
for these two categories of dependant are summarized hereunder: 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.41 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
 
Dependent 
Maximum limit (`) 
(1) 
A senior citizen, being a resident individual 
1,00,000 
(2) 
Other than a senior citizen 
40,000 
(vi) Condition: No such deduction shall be allowed unless the assessee obtains 
the prescription for such medical treatment from a neurologist, an oncologist, 
a urologist, a hematologist, an immunologist or such other specialist, as may 
be prescribed. 
2.9 Deduction in respect of interest on loan taken for higher 
education [Section 80E] 
 
[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of 
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)] 
(i)
Eligible assessee: Section 80E provides deduction to an individual-assessee
in respect of any interest on loan paid by him in the previous year out of his 
income chargeable to tax. 
(ii)
Conditions: The loan must have been taken for the purpose of pursuing his 
higher education or for the purpose of higher education of his or her relative. 
The loan must have been taken from any financial institution or approved 
charitable institution. 
(iii)
Meaning of certain terms: 
 
Term 
Meaning 
(a) 
Relative 
Spouse and children of the individual or the student 
for whom the individual is the legal guardian 
(b) 
Higher 
education 
It means any course of study (including vocational 
studies) pursued after passing the Senior Secondary 
Examination or its equivalent from any school, board 
or university recognised by the Central Government or 
State Government or local authority or by any other 
authority authorized by the Central Government or 
State Government or local authority to do so.  
Therefore, interest on loan taken for pursuing any 
course after Class XII or its equivalent, will qualify for 
deduction under section 80E. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.42 
(c) 
Period of 
deduction 
The deduction is allowed in computing the total 
income in respect of the initial assessment year (i.e. the 
assessment year relevant to the previous year, in which 
the assessee starts paying the interest on the loan) and 
seven assessment years immediately succeeding the 
initial assessment year or until the interest is paid in 
full by the assessee, whichever is earlier. 
(d) 
Approved 
charitable 
institution 
It means an institution established for charitable 
purposes and approved by the prescribed authority3 
or an institution referred to in section 80G(2)(a). 
(e) 
Financial 
institution 
It means – 
(a) a banking company to which the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 applies (including a bank or 
banking institution referred to in section 51 of the 
Act); or 
(b) any other financial institution which the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify in this behalf 
ILLUSTRATION 11 
Mr. B has taken three education loans on April 1, 2023, the details of which are given 
below: 
 
Loan 1 
Loan 2 
Loan 3 
For whose education loan was taken 
B
Son of B
Daughter of B
Purpose of loan  
MBA 
B. Sc. 
B.A. 
Amount of loan (`) 
5,00,000 
2,00,000 
4,00,000 
Annual repayment of loan (`) 
1,00,000 
40,000 
80,000 
Annual repayment of interest (`) 
20,000 
10,000 
18,000 
Compute the amount deductible under section 80E for the A.Y.2024-25 if Mr. B has 
exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 
115BAC(1A). 
3 under section 10(23C)
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.43 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
SOLUTION  
Deduction under section 80E is available to an individual assessee exercising the 
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), 
in respect of any interest paid by him in the previous year in respect of loan taken 
for pursuing his higher education or higher education of his spouse or children. 
Higher education means any course of study pursued after senior secondary 
examination. 
Therefore, interest repayment in respect of all the above loans would be eligible 
for deduction.   
Deduction under section 80E = ` 20,000 + ` 10,000 + ` 18,000 = ` 48,000. 
2.10 Deduction for interest payable on loan borrowed for 
acquisition of residential house property by an individual 
[Section 80EE] 
[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of 
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)] 
(i) 
Eligible assessee: An individual who has taken a loan for acquisition of 
residential house property from any financial institution. Interest payable on 
such loan would qualify for deduction under this section. 
(ii) 
Conditions: The conditions to be satisfied for availing this deduction are as 
follows – 
(iii) Period of benefit: The benefit of deduction under this section would be 
available till the repayment of loan continues.  
Conditions
Value of house ≤ ` 50 lakhs
Loan should be sanctioned 
during the P.Y.2016-17
Loan sanctioned ≤ ` 35 lakhs
The assessee should 
not own any residential 
house on the date of 
sanction of loan 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.44 
(iv)
Quantum of deduction: The maximum deduction allowable is ` 50,000. The 
deduction of upto ` 50,000 under section 80EE is over and above the 
deduction of upto ` 2,00,000 available under section 24 for interest paid in 
respect of loan borrowed for acquisition of a self-occupied property. 
(v)
No deduction under any other provision: The interest allowed as deduction 
under section 80EE will not be allowed as deduction under any other 
provision of the Act for the same or any other assessment year.  
(vi) Meaning of certain terms: 
 
Term 
Meaning 
(a) 
Financial 
institution 
•
A banking company to which the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 applies; or 
•
Any bank or banking institution referred to in 
section 51 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949; or 
•
A housing finance company. 
(b) 
Housing 
finance 
company 
A public company formed or registered in India with 
the main object of carrying on the business of 
providing long-term finance for construction or 
purchase of houses in India for residential purposes.  
ILLUSTRATION 12 
Mr. A purchased a residential house property for self-occupation at a cost of ` 45 
lakh on 1.4.2017, in respect of which he took a housing loan of ` 35 lakh from Bank 
of India@11% p.a. on the same date. The loan was sanctioned on 28th March, 2017. 
Compute the eligible deduction in respect of interest on housing loan for  
A.Y.2024-25 if Mr. A has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime 
provided under section 115BAC(1A), assuming that the entire loan was outstanding 
as on 31.3.2024 and he does not own any other house property. 
SOLUTION 
Particulars 
` 
Interest deduction for A.Y.2024-25 
 
(i)
Deduction allowable while computing income under the 
head “Income from house property” 
 
Deduction under section 24(b) ` 3,85,000 
[` 35,00,000 × 11%] 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.45 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
 
Restricted to  
2,00,000 
(ii) 
Deduction under Chapter VI-A from Gross Total Income 
 
 
Deduction under section 80EE ` 1,85,000 
 (` 3,85,000 – ` 2,00,000) 
Restricted to 
 
 
50,000 
2.11 Deduction for interest payable on loan borrowed for 
acquisition 
of 
residential 
house 
property  
[Section 80EEA] 
[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of 
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)] 
(i) 
Eligible assessee: An individual who has taken a loan for acquisition of 
residential house property from any financial institution. Interest payable on 
such loan would qualify for deduction under this section. 
(ii) 
Conditions: The conditions to be satisfied for availing this deduction are as 
follows –  
(iii) Period of benefit: The benefit of deduction under this section would be 
available for interest payable for each assessment year.  
(iv) Quantum of deduction: The maximum deduction allowable is ` 1,50,000. 
The deduction of upto ` 1,50,000 under section 80EEA is over and above the 
Conditions
Stamp Duty Value of 
house ≤  ` 45 lakhs
Loan should be 
sanctioned by the 
Financial Institution 
between 1st April, 2019 
and 31st March 2022
The individual should not 
be eligible to claim 
deduction u/s 80EE
The individual should 
not own any 
residential house on 
the date of sanction of 
loan 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.46 
deduction available under section 24(b) in respect of interest payable on loan 
borrowed for acquisition of a residential house property. 
(v) 
No deduction under any other provision: The interest allowed as deduction 
under section 80EEA will not be allowed as deduction under any other 
provision of the Act for the same or any other assessment year.  
(vi) Meaning of certain terms: 
 
Term 
Meaning 
(a) 
Financial 
institution 
•
A banking company to which the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 applies; or 
•
Any bank or banking institution referred to in 
section 51 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949; or 
•
A housing finance company. 
(b) 
Housing 
finance 
company 
A public company formed or registered in India with the 
main object of carrying on the business of providing 
long-term finance for construction or purchase of 
houses in India for residential purposes.  
In case the assessee pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC 
Deduction in respect of interest payable on loan 
borrowed for acquisition of a residential house property
In case of self-occupied 
house property
No interest deduction u/s 24(b)
No deduction u/s 80EEA
In case of let out or deemed 
to be let out property
No limit u/s 24(b). Entire interest payable 
is allowable as deduction. However, loss 
from house property cannot be set off 
against income under any other head.
No deduction u/s 80EEA
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.47 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
In case the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default 
tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) 
 
2.12 Deduction in respect of interest payable on loan taken 
for purchase of electric vehicle [Section 80EEB] 
[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of 
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)] 
(i) 
Eligible Assessee: An individual who has taken a loan for purchase of an 
electric vehicle from any financial institution.  Interest payable on such loan 
would qualify for deduction under this section.  
Deduction in respect of interest payable on loan borrowed for 
acquisition of a residential house property
In case of self-occupied 
house property
restricted to ` 2,00,000 u/s 24(b)
Deduction for interest upto
` 1,50,000 can be claimed u/s 
80EEA over and above deduction 
u/s 24(b) 
In case of let out or deemed to 
be let out property
No limit u/s 24(b). Entire interest 
payable is allowable as deduction. 
However, section 71(3A) restricts set 
off of loss from house property 
against income under any other 
head to ` 2,00,000.
If there is a loss from house 
property and it is more than
` 2,00,000, interest of  ` 2,00,000 
can be claimed as deduction u/s 
24(b) and balance interest upto            
` 1,50,000 can be claimed u/s 
80EEA.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.48 
(ii) 
Conditions: The conditions to be satisfied for availing this deduction are as 
follows – 
(iii) Period of benefit: The benefit of deduction under this section would be 
available for interest payable on such loan for each assessment year.  
(iv) Quantum of deduction: Interest payable, subject to a maximum of  
` 1,50,000.  
(v) 
No deduction under any other provision: The interest allowed as deduction 
under section 80EEB will not be allowed as deduction under any other 
provision of the Act for the same or any other assessment year.   
(vi) Meaning of certain terms: 
 
Term 
Meaning 
(a) 
Financial 
institution 
•
A banking company to which the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 applies; or 
•
Any bank or banking institution referred to in 
section 51 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949; or 
•
Any deposit taking NBFC; or 
•
A systemically important non-deposit taking NBFC 
i.e., a NBFC which is not accepting or holding public 
deposits and having total assets of not less than  
` 500 crore as per the last audited balance sheet and 
is registered with the RBI. 
(b) 
Electric 
A vehicle which is powered exclusively by an electric 
motor whose traction energy is supplied exclusively by 
Conditions
Loan should be taken for 
purchase of an electric vehicle
Loan should be sanctioned 
between 1.4.2019 and 
31.3.2023
Loan should be sanctioned 
by a FI (bank or specified 
NBFCs)
The assessee should be 
an individual.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.49 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
Vehicle 
traction battery installed in the vehicle. The vehicle 
should have electric regenerative braking system, which 
during braking provides for the conversion of vehicle 
kinetic energy into electrical energy.  
ILLUSTRATION 13 
The following are the particulars relating to Mr. A, Mr. B, Mr. C and Mr. D, salaried 
individuals, for A.Y. 2024-25 – 
Particulars 
Mr. A 
Mr. B 
Mr. C 
Mr. D 
Amount of loan 
taken 
` 43 lakhs 
` 45 lakhs 
` 20 lakhs 
` 15 lakhs 
Loan taken from 
HFC
Deposit taking 
NBFC 
Deposit 
taking NBFC 
Public 
sector bank 
Date of sanction 
of loan 
1.4.2021 
1.4.2020 
1.4.2020 
30.3.2019 
Date 
of 
disbursement 
of 
loan 
1.5.2021 
1.5.2020 
1.5.2020 
1.5.2019 
Purpose of loan 
Acquisition of 
residential 
house property 
for 
self-
occupation 
Acquisition of 
residential 
house property 
for 
self-
occupation 
Purchase of 
electric 
vehicle 
for 
personal use  
Purchase of 
electric 
vehicle for 
personal 
use 
Stamp duty value 
of house property 
` 45 lakhs 
` 48 lakhs  
- 
- 
Cost of electric 
vehicle
- 
- 
` 22 lakhs 
` 18 lakhs 
Rate of interest 
9% p.a. 
9% p.a. 
10% p.a. 
10% p.a. 
Compute the amount of deduction, if any, allowable under the provisions of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961 for A.Y.2024-25 in the hands of Mr. A, Mr. B, Mr. C and Mr. D if 
they have exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under 
section 115BAC(1A). Assume that there has been no principal repayment in respect 
of any of the above loans upto 31.3.2024.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.50 
SOLUTION 
Particulars
` 
Mr. A 
 
Interest deduction for A.Y.2024-25 
 
(i) 
Deduction allowable while computing income under the 
head “Income from house property” 
 
 
Deduction u/s 24(b) ` 3,87,000 [` 43,00,000 × 9%] 
 
 
Restricted to  
2,00,000 
(ii) 
Deduction under Chapter VI-A from Gross Total Income 
 
 
Deduction u/s 80EEA ` 1,87,000 (` 3,87,000 – ` 2,00,000) 
Restricted to 
 
1,50,000 
Mr. B 
 
Interest deduction for A.Y.2024-25 
 
(i) 
Deduction allowable while computing income under the 
head “Income from house property”
 
 
Deduction u/s 24(b) ` 4,05,000 [` 45,00,000 × 9%] 
 
 
Restricted to  
2,00,000 
(ii) 
Deduction under Chapter VI-A from Gross Total Income 
 
 
Deduction u/s 80EEA is not permissible since: 
(i)  loan is taken from NBFC 
(ii) stamp duty value exceeds ` 45 lakh. 
Deduction under section 80EEA would not be permissible 
due to either violation listed above. 
Nil 
Mr. C 
 
Deduction under Chapter VI-A from Gross Total Income 
 
Deduction u/s 80EEB for interest payable on loan taken for purchase of 
electric vehicle [` 20 lakhs x 10% = ` 2,00,000, restricted to ` 1,50,000, 
being the maximum permissible deduction] 
1,50,000 
Mr. D 
 
Deduction under Chapter VI-A from Gross Total Income 
 
Deduction u/s 80EEB is not permissible since loan was sanctioned 
before 1.4.2019.   
Nil 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.51 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
2.13 Deduction in respect of donations to certain funds, 
charitable institutions etc. [Section 80G] 
(i)
Eligible assessee: An assessee who pays any sum as donation to eligible 
funds or institutions, is entitled to a deduction, subject to certain limitations, 
from the gross total income. 
In case of an individual, HUF, AoP (other than a co-operative society) or BoI or 
an artificial juridical person, deduction would be available only if they have 
exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under 
section 115BAC(1A). It would not be available if they pay concessional rates of 
tax under the default tax regime u/s 115BAC. 
In case of companies and co-operative societies, deduction would not be 
available if they opt for the special provisions u/s 115BAA/115BAB and section 
115BAD/115BAE, respectively. In other words, deduction would be available 
only if they pay tax under the normal provisions of the Act.  
(ii)
Quantum of deduction: 
 
There are four categories of deductions. The following table gives the details 
of the institutions and funds to which donations can be made for the purpose 
of claiming deduction under section 80G, – 
I 
Donation qualifying for 100% deduction, without any 
qualifying limit 
(1) 
The National Defence Fund set up by the Central Government 
(2) 
Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund. 
(3) 
Prime Minister’s Armenia Earthquake Relief Fund 
(4) 
The Africa (Public Contributions-India) Fund 
(5) 
The National Children’s Fund 
(6) 
The National Foundation for Communal Harmony 
(7) 
Approved University or educational institution of national 
eminence 
(8) 
Chief Minister’s Earthquake Relief Fund, Maharashtra 
(9) 
Any fund set up by the State Government of Gujarat exclusively for 
providing relief to the victims of the Gujarat earthquake 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.52 
(10) 
Any Zila Saksharta Samiti constituted in any district for 
improvement of primary education in villages and towns and for 
literacy and post-literacy activities 
(11) 
National Blood Transfusion Council or any State Blood Transfusion 
Council whose sole objective is the control, supervision, regulation 
or encouragement in India of the services related to operation and 
requirements of blood banks 
(12) 
Any State Government Fund set up to provide medical relief to the 
poor 
(13) 
The Army Central Welfare Fund or Indian Naval Benevolent Fund or 
Air Force Central Welfare Fund established by the armed forces of 
the Union for the welfare of past and present members of such forces 
or their dependents.
(14) 
The Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister’s Cyclone Relief Fund, 1996 
(15) 
The National Illness Assistance Fund 
(16) 
The Chief Minister’s Relief Fund or Lieutenant Governor’s Relief 
Fund in respect of any State or Union Territory 
(17) 
The National Sports Fund set up by the Central Government
(18) 
The National Cultural Fund set up by the Central Government 
(19) 
The Fund for Technology Development and Application set up by 
the Central Government 
(20) 
National Trust for welfare of persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, 
Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities 
(21) 
The Swachh Bharat Kosh, set up by the Central Government, other 
than the sum spent by the assessee in pursuance of CSR u/s 135(5) 
of the Companies Act, 2013 
(22) 
The Clean Ganga Fund, set up by the Central Government, where 
such assessee is a resident, other than the sum spent in pursuance 
of CSR u/s 135(5) of the Companies Act, 2013 
(23) 
The National Fund for Control of Drug Abuse  
(24) 
Prime Minister's Citizen Assistance and Relief in Emergency 
Situations Fund (PM Cares Fund) 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.53 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
II 
Donation qualifying for 50% deduction, without any 
qualifying limit 
(1) 
Prime Minister’s Drought Relief Fund 
III 
Donation qualifying for 100% deduction, subject to qualifying 
limit 
(1) 
The Government or to any approved local authority, institution or 
association for promotion of family planning 
(2) 
Sum paid by a company as donation to the Indian Olympic 
Association or any other association/institution established in 
India, as may be notified by the Government for the development 
of infrastructure for sports or games, or the sponsorship of sports 
and games in India
IV
Donation qualifying for 50% deduction, subject to qualifying 
limit 
(1) 
Any Institution or Fund established in India for charitable purposes 
fulfilling prescribed conditions 
(2) 
The Government or any local authority for utilisation for any 
charitable purpose other than the purpose of promoting family 
planning
(3) 
An authority constituted in India by or under any other law 
enacted either for dealing with and satisfying the need for housing 
accommodation or for the purpose of planning, development or 
improvement of cities, towns and villages, or both 
(4) 
Any Corporation established by the Central Government or any 
State Government for promoting the interests of the members of 
a minority community 
(5) 
for renovation or repair of Notified temple, mosque, gurdwara, 
church or other place of historic, archaeological or artistic 
importance or which is a place of public worship of renown 
throughout any State or States 
(iii) Qualifying limit: The eligible donations referred to in III and IV should be 
aggregated and the sum total should be limited to 10% of the adjusted gross 
total income. This would be the maximum permissible deduction.   
 
The donations qualifying for 100% deduction would be first adjusted from 
the maximum permissible deduction and thereafter 50% deduction of the 
balance would be allowed.   
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.54 
Steps for computation of qualifying limit 
Step 1: 
Compute adjusted total income i.e., the GTI as reduced by the 
following: 
(i)  Deductions under Chapter VI-A, except under section 80G 
(ii)  Short-term capital gain taxable under section 111A 
(iii)  Long-term capital gains taxable under sections 112 & 112A 
(iv)  Any income on which income-tax is not payable 
Step 2:
Calculate 10% of adjusted total income
Step 3:  
Calculate the actual donation, which is subject to qualifying limit 
(Total of Category III and IV donations, shown in the table above) 
Step 4:  
Lower of Step 2 or Step 3 is the maximum permissible deduction. 
Step 5:
The said deduction is adjusted first against donations qualifying 
for 100% deduction (i.e., Category III donations). Thereafter, 50% 
of balance qualifies for deduction under section 80G. 
(iv) Other points: 
(1) 
Where an assessee has claimed and has been allowed any deduction 
under this section in respect of any amount of donation, the same 
amount will not qualify for deduction under any other provision of the 
Act for the same or any other assessment year. 
(2) 
Donations in kind shall not qualify for deduction. 
(3) 
No deduction shall be allowed in respect of donation of any sum 
exceeding ` 2,000 unless such sum is paid by any mode other than cash. 
(4) 
The deduction under section 80G can be claimed whether it has any 
nexus with the business of the assessee or not. 
(5) 
As per Circular No.2/2005 dated 12.1.2005, in cases where employees 
make donations to the Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund, the Chief 
Minister’s Relief Fund or the Lieutenant Governor’s Relief Fund through 
their respective employers, it is not possible for such funds to issue 
separate certificate to every such employee in respect of donations 
made to such funds as contributions made to these funds are in the 
form of a consolidated cheque. An employee who makes donations 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.55 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
towards these funds is eligible to claim deduction under section 80G.  It 
is, hereby, clarified that the claim in respect of such donations as 
indicated above will be admissible under section 80G on the basis of 
the certificate issued by the Drawing and Disbursing Officer 
(DDO)/Employer in this behalf. 
(6) 
The claim of the assessee for deduction in respect of any donation made 
to an institution or fund [referred to in point (1) under (IV) “Donation 
qualifying for 50% deduction, subject to qualifying limit”], in the return 
of income for any assessment year filed by him, will be allowed on the 
basis of information relating to said donation furnished by the 
institution or fund to the prescribed income-tax authority or person 
authorized by such authority, subject to verification as per the risk 
management strategy formulated by the CBDT from time to time.    
ILLUSTRATION 14 
Mr. Shiva aged 58 years, has gross total income of ` 7,75,000 comprising of income 
from salary and house property. He has made the following payments and 
investments: 
(i) 
Premium paid to insure the life of her major daughter (policy taken on 1.4.2018) 
(Assured value ` 1,80,000) – ` 20,000. 
(ii) 
Medical Insurance premium for self – ` 12,000; Spouse – ` 14,000. 
(iii) 
Donation to a public charitable institution ` 50,000 by way of cheque. 
(iv) 
LIC Pension Fund – ` 60,000. 
(v) 
Donation to National Children’s Fund - ` 25,000 by way of cheque 
(vi) 
Donation to Prime Minister’s Drought Relief Fund - ` 25,000 by way of cheque 
(vii) Donation to approved institution for promotion of family planning - ` 40,000 
by way of cheque 
(viii) Deposit in PPF – ` 1,00,000 
Compute the total income of Mr. Shiva for A.Y. 2024-25 if he exercises the option of 
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.56 
SOLUTION 
Computation of Total Income of Mr. Shiva for A.Y. 2024-25 
Particulars 
` 
` 
Gross Total Income 
7,75,000 
Less: Deduction under section 80C 
 
 
Deposit in PPF 
1,00,000
 
 
Life insurance premium paid for insurance of 
 
major daughter (Maximum 10% of the assured value 
 
` 1,80,000, as the policy is taken after 31.3.2012) 
  18,000
 
 
1,18,000
 
 
Deduction under section 80CCC in respect of LIC 
 
pension fund  
  60,000
 
 
 
1,78,000
 
As per section 80CCE, deduction under section 80C & 
80CCC is restricted to  
1,50,000 
Deduction under section 80D 
 
Medical Insurance premium in respect of self and spouse 
26,000
 
Restricted to  
25,000 
Deduction under section 80G (See Working Note 
below) 
 
 87,500 
Total income  
5,12,500 
Working Note: Computation of deduction under section 80G 
 
Particulars of donation 
Amount 
donated 
(`) 
% of deduction 
Deduction 
u/s 80G (`) 
(i) 
National Children’s Fund 
25,000 
100% 
25,000 
(ii) 
Prime 
Minister’s 
Drought Relief Fund
25,000 
50% 
12,500 
(iii) 
Approved institution for 
promotion 
of 
family 
planning 
40,000 
100%, subject to 
qualifying limit 
40,000 
(iv) 
Public Charitable Trust 
50,000 
50% subject to 
qualifying limit 
(See Note below) 
 
 
10,000 
 
 
 
 
87,500 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.57 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
Note - Adjusted total income = Gross Total Income – Amount of deductions under 
section 80C to 80U except section 80G i.e., ` 6,00,000, in this case. 
` 60,000, being 10% of adjusted total income is the qualifying limit, in this case. 
Firstly, donation of ` 40,000 to approved institution for family planning qualifying 
for 100% deduction subject to qualifying limit, has to be adjusted against this 
amount. Thereafter, donation to public charitable trust qualifying for 50% 
deduction, subject to qualifying limit is adjusted. Hence, the contribution of  
` 50,000 to public charitable trust is restricted to 20,000 (being, ` 60,000 -  
` 40,000), 50% of which would be the deduction under section 80G.  Therefore, the 
deduction under section 80G in respect of donation to public charitable trust would 
be ` 10,000, which is 50% of ` 20,000.  
2.14 Deduction in respect of rent paid [Section 80GG] 
[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out 
of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]  
(i)
Eligible assessee: Assessee, who is not in receipt of HRA qualifying for 
exemption under section 10(13A) from employer and who pays rent for 
accommodation occupied by him for residential purposes.  
(ii)
Conditions: The following conditions have to be satisfied for claiming 
deduction under section 80GG - 
(1)
The assessee should not be receiving any house rent allowance exempt 
under section 10(13A). 
(2)
The expenditure incurred by him on rent of any furnished or 
unfurnished accommodation should exceed 10% of his total income 
arrived at after all deductions under Chapter VI-A except section 80GG. 
(3)
The accommodation should be occupied by the assessee for the 
purposes of his own residence. 
(4)
The assessee should fulfill such other conditions or limitations as may 
be prescribed, having regard to the area or place in which such 
accommodation is situated and other relevant considerations. 
(5)
The assessee or his spouse or his minor child or a HUF of which he is a 
member should not own any accommodation at the place where he 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.58 
ordinarily resides or perform duties of his office or employment or 
carries on his business or profession; or 
(6)
If the assessee owns any accommodation at any place other than that 
referred to above, such accommodation should not be in the 
occupation of the assessee and its annual value is not required to be 
determined under section 23(2)(a) or section 23(4)(a). 
(7)
The assessee should file a declaration in the prescribed form, 
confirming the details of rent paid and fulfillment of other conditions, 
with the return of income. 
(iii)
Quantum of deduction: The deduction admissible will be the least of the 
following: 
(1)
Actual rent paid minus 10% of the total income of the assessee before 
allowing the deduction, or 
(2)
25% of such total income (arrived at after making all deductions under 
Chapter VI A but before making any deduction under this section), or 
(3)
Amount calculated at ` 5,000 p.m. 
ILLUSTRATION 15 
Mr. Ganesh, a businessman, whose total income (before allowing deduction under 
section 80GG) for A.Y.2024-25 is ` 4,60,000, paid house rent at ` 12,000 p.m. in respect 
of residential accommodation occupied by him at Mumbai. Compute the deduction 
allowable to him under section 80GG for A.Y.2024-25 if he has exercised the option of 
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). 
SOLUTION 
The deduction under section 80GG will be computed as follows: 
(i) 
Actual rent paid less 10% of total income 
 
` 1,44,000 (-) (10×4,60,000)
100
 = ` 98,000 (A) 
(ii) 
25% of total income = 25×4,60,000
100
 = ` 1,15,000 (B) 
(iii) 
Amount calculated at ` 5,000 p.m. = ` 60,000 (C) 
Deduction allowable u/s 80GG [least of (i), (ii) and (iii)] = ` 60,000 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.59 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
2.15 Deduction in respect of donations for scientific research 
and rural development [Section 80GGA] 
(i)
Eligible assessee: Any assessee not having income chargeable under the 
head “Profits and gains of business or profession”, who makes donations for 
scientific research or rural development. 
An individual, HUF, AoP (other than a co-operative society) or BoI or an 
artificial juridical person will be eligible for deduction u/s 80GGA only if they  
have exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided 
under section 115BAC(1A).  
(ii)
Donations qualifying for deduction: 
(1)
Any sum paid by the assessee in the previous year to a research 
association which has, as its object, the undertaking of scientific 
research or to a University, college or other institution to be used for 
scientific research;  
 
Such association, University, college or institution must be approved 
under section 35(1)(ii). 
(2)
Any sum paid to a research association which has as its object the 
undertaking of research in social science or statistical research, 
University, College or other institution to be used for research in social 
science or statistical research. 
 
Such association, University, college or institution must be approved 
under section 35(1)(iii). 
(3)
Any sum paid by the assessee in the previous year to an association or 
institution which has as its object the undertaking of any programme of 
rural development, to be used for carrying out any programme of rural 
development approved by the prescribed authority for purposes of 
section 35CCA or to an institution or association which has as its object 
the training of persons for implementing programmes of rural 
development. 
It has been clarified that the deduction to which an assessee (i.e. donor) 
is entitled on account of payment of any sum to  
-    
a research association or university or college or other institution 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.60 
for scientific research or research in a social science or statistical 
research or 
-   
an association or institution for carrying out the programme of 
rural development or 
shall not be denied merely on the ground that subsequent to payment 
of such sum by the assessee, the approval granted to any of the 
aforesaid entities is withdrawn. 
(4)
Any sum paid to a public sector company or a local authority or to an 
association or institution approved by the National Committee for 
carrying out any eligible project or scheme. 
It has been clarified that the deduction to which an assessee (i.e. donor) 
is entitled on account of above shall not be denied merely on the 
ground that subsequent to payment of such sum by the assessee, the 
approval granted to any of the aforesaid entities is withdrawn or the 
notification notifying the eligible project or scheme carried out 
aforesaid entities has been withdrawn. 
(5)
Any sum paid to a rural development fund set up and notified under 
section 35CCA. 
(6)
Any sum paid by the assessee in the previous year to National Urban 
Poverty Eradication Fund (NUPEF). 
(iii)
Restrictions on deduction: 
(1)
No deduction under this section would be allowed in the case of an 
assessee whose gross total income includes income which is chargeable 
under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession.” 
(2)
Where a deduction under this section is claimed and allowed for any 
assessment year, deduction shall not be allowed in respect of such 
payment under any provision of this Act for the same or any other 
assessment year. 
(3)
No deduction shall be allowed in respect of donation of any sum 
exceeding ` 2,000 unless such sum is paid by any mode other than cash. 
(4)
The claim of the assessee for deduction in respect of any sum referred 
to under “(ii) Donations qualifying for deduction” in the return of 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.61 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
income for any assessment year filed by him, will be allowed on the 
basis of information relating to such sum furnished by the payee to the 
prescribed income-tax authority or person authorized by such 
authority, subject to verification as per the risk management strategy 
formulated by the CBDT from time to time.    
2.16 Deduction in respect of contributions given by 
companies to political parties [Section 80GGB] 
(i) 
Deduction & Conditions: This section provides for deduction of any sum 
contributed in the previous year by an Indian company4 to any political party 
or an electoral trust. However, no deduction shall be allowed in respect of 
any sum contributed by way of cash.  
(ii) 
Meaning of “Contribute”: For the purposes of this section, the word 
“contribute” has the same meaning assigned to it under section 293A of the 
Companies Act, 19565, which provides that - 
(a) 
a donation or subscription or payment given by a company to a person 
for carrying on any activity which is likely to effect public support for a 
political party shall also be deemed to be contribution for a political 
purpose; 
(b) 
the expenditure incurred, directly or indirectly, by a company on 
advertisement in any publication (being a publication in the nature of a 
souvenir, brochure, tract, pamphlet or the like) by or on behalf of a 
political party or for its advantage shall also be deemed to be a 
contribution to such political party or a contribution for a political 
purpose to the person publishing it. 
(iii) Meaning of “Political party”: It means a political party registered under 
section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
ILLUSTRATION 16 
During the P.Y. 2023-24, ABC Ltd., an Indian company,  
(1) 
contributed a sum of ` 2 lakh to an electoral trust; and 
4 Not opting for section 115BAA/ 115BAB
5Now section 182 of the Companies Act, 2013
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.62 
(2) 
incurred expenditure of ` 25,000 on advertisement in a brochure of a political 
party. 
Is the company eligible for deduction in respect of such contribution/expenditure, 
assuming that the contribution was made by cheque?  If so, what is the quantum of 
deduction? ABC Ltd. does not opt for section 115BAA/115BAB. 
SOLUTION 
An Indian company is eligible for deduction under section 80GGB in respect of any 
sum contributed by it in the previous year to any political party or an electoral trust. 
Further, the word “contribute” in section 80GGB has the meaning assigned to it in 
section 293A of the Companies Act, 1956, and accordingly, it includes the amount 
of expenditure incurred on advertisement in a brochure of a political party.  
Therefore, ABC Ltd. is eligible for a deduction of ` 2,25,000 under section 80GGB in 
respect of sum of ` 2 lakh contributed to an electoral trust and ` 25,000 incurred 
by it on advertisement in a brochure of a political party.  
It may be noted that there is a specific disallowance under section 37(2B) in respect 
of expenditure incurred on advertisement in a brochure of a political party. 
Therefore, the expenditure of ` 25,000 would be disallowed while computing 
business income/gross total income. However, the said expenditure incurred by an 
Indian company is allowable as a deduction from gross total income under section 
80GGB. 
2.17 Deduction in respect of contributions given by any 
person to political parties [Section 80GGC] 
(i) 
Deduction & Conditions: This section provides for deduction of any sum 
contributed in the previous year by any person to a political party or an 
electoral trust. However, no deduction shall be allowed in respect of any sum 
contributed by way of cash.  
(ii) 
Persons not eligible for deduction: This deduction will, however, not be 
available to a local authority and an artificial juridical person, wholly or partly 
funded by the Government. 
(iii) Meaning of “Political party”: It means a political party registered under 
section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.63 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
An individual, HUF, AoP (other than a co-operative society) or BoI 
would be eligible for deduction u/s 80GGC only if they have exercised 
the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under 
section 115BAC(1A). A co-operative society will not be eligible for deduction if it 
opts for special provisions of section 115BAD/115BAE.  
3.  DEDUCTIONS IN RESPECT OF CERTAIN INCOMES 
3.1  Deduction in respect of employment of new employees 
[Section 80JJAA] 
(i) 
Quantum and period of deduction: Where the gross total income of an 
assessee to whom section 44AB applies, includes any profits and gains 
derived from business, a deduction of an amount equal to 30% of additional 
employee cost incurred in the course of such business in the previous year, 
would be allowed for three assessment years including the assessment year 
relevant to the previous year in which such employment is provided. 
(ii) 
Conditions to be fulfilled: The deduction would be allowed only subject to 
fulfilment of the following conditions: 
(iii) Meaning of certain terms: 
 
Term 
Meaning
(a)
Additional 
employee cost 
Total emoluments paid or payable to additional 
employees employed during the previous year. 
 
The business should 
not be formed by 
splitting up, or the 
reconstruction, of an 
existing business
The business is 
not acquired by the 
assessee by way of 
transfer from any 
other person or as 
a result of any 
business 
reorganisation
The report of the accountant, 
giving the prescribed particulars, 
has to be furnished before 30th 
September of the A.Y., being the 
specified date referred to in 
Section 44AB i.e., the date one 
month prior to due date for 
filing ROI u/s 139(1)
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.64 
In 
the 
case of 
an 
existing 
business 
The additional employee cost shall be 
Nil, if - 
(a) there is no increase in the number of 
employees from the total number of 
employees employed as on the last 
day of the preceding year; 
(b)  emoluments are paid otherwise than 
by an account payee cheque or 
account payee bank draft or by use 
of electronic clearing system through 
a bank account or through any other 
prescribed electronic mode [credit 
card, debit card, net banking, IMPS 
(Immediate Payment Services), UPI 
(Unified Payment Interface), RTGS 
(Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT 
(National Electronic Fund Transfer), 
BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) 
Aadhar Pay].   
In 
the 
first 
year of a 
new 
business 
The emoluments paid6 or payable to 
employees 
employed 
during 
that 
previous year shall be deemed to be the 
additional employee cost. 
(b)
Additional 
employee 
An employee who has been employed during the 
previous year and whose employment has the effect 
of increasing the total number of employees 
employed by the employer as on the last day of the 
preceding year.   
Exclusions from the definition:  
(a) an employee whose total emoluments are more 
than ` 25,000 per month; or 
(b) an employee for whom the entire contribution 
is paid by the Government under the 
6 As per Form No.10DA read with Rule 19AB, the amount shall not include emoluments  paid 
otherwise than by way of account payee cheque/bank draft/ECS through a bank account and 
prescribed electronic modes 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.65 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
Employees’ 
Pension 
Scheme 
notified 
in 
accordance 
with 
the 
provisions 
of 
the 
Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952; or 
(c) an employee who does not participate in the 
recognised provident fund.  
(d) an employee employed for a period of less than 
240 days during the previous year. In case of an 
assessee 
engaged 
in 
the 
business 
of 
manufacturing of apparel or footwear or 
leather products, an employee employed for a 
period of less than 150 days during the 
previous year; or 
Note – If an employee is employed during the 
previous year for less than 240 days or 150 days, as 
the case may be, but is employed for a period of 
240 days or 150 days, as the case may be, in the 
immediately succeeding year, he shall be deemed 
to have been employed in the succeeding year.  
Accordingly, the employer would be entitled to 
deduction of 30% of additional employee cost of 
such employees for three years from the succeeding 
year. 
(c)
Emoluments 
any sum paid or payable to an employee in lieu of 
his employment by whatever name called.  
Exclusions from the definition: 
(a) any contribution paid or payable by the 
employer to any pension fund or provident 
fund or any other fund for the benefit of the 
employee under any law for the time being in 
force; and 
(b) any lump-sum payment paid or payable to an 
employee at the time of termination of his 
service 
or 
superannuation 
or 
voluntary 
retirement, such as gratuity, severance pay, 
leave encashment, voluntary retrenchment 
benefits, commutation of pension and the like. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.66 
Deduction u/s 80JJAA would be available to an assessee irrespective 
of the regime under which he pays tax. 
 
ILLUSTRATION 17 
Mr. A has commenced the business of manufacture of computers on 1.4.2023. He 
employed 350 new employees during the P.Y. 2023-24, the details of whom are as 
follows – 
 
No. of 
employees 
Date of 
employment 
Regular/ 
Casual 
Total monthly 
emoluments per 
employee (`) 
(i) 
75 
1.4.2023 
Regular 
24,000 
(ii) 
125 
1.5.2023 
Regular 
26,000 
(iii) 
50 
1.8.2023 
Casual 
24,500 
(iv) 
100 
1.9.2023 
Regular 
24,000 
The regular employees participate in recognized provident fund while the casual 
employees do not. Compute the deduction, if any, available to Mr. A for  
A.Y. 2024-25, if the profits and gains derived from manufacture of computers that 
year is ` 75 lakhs and his total turnover is ` 10.16 crores. 
What would be your answer if Mr. A has commenced the business of manufacture of 
footwear on 1.4.2023? 
SOLUTION 
Mr. A is eligible for deduction under section 80JJAA since he is subject to tax audit 
under section 44AB for A.Y. 2024-25 and he has employed “additional employees” 
during the P.Y. 2023-24. 
I 
If Mr. A is engaged in the business of manufacture of computers 
Additional employee cost = ` 24,000 × 12 × 75 [See Working Note below] 
 
= ` 2,16,00,000 
 
Deduction under section 80JJAA = 30% of ` 2,16,00,000 = ` 64,80,000. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.67 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
Working Note:   
Number of additional employees  
Particulars
No. of 
workmen 
Total number of employees employed during the year 
 
350 
Less: 
Casual employees employed on 1.8.2023 who do 
not participate in recognized provident fund 
50 
 
 
Regular employees employed on 1.5.2023, since 
their total monthly emoluments exceed ` 25,000 
125 
 
 
Regular employees employed on 1.9.2023 since 
they have been employed for less than 240 days 
in the P.Y.2023-24.  
 
100 
 
275 
Number of “additional employees”
 
75 
Notes –  
(i)  
Since casual employees do not participate in recognized provident fund, 
they do not qualify as additional employees. Further, 125 regular 
employees employed on 1.5.2023 also do not qualify as additional 
employees since their monthly emoluments exceed ` 25,000.  Also, 100 
regular employees employed on 1.9.2023 do not qualify as additional 
employees for the P.Y.2023-24, since they are employed for less than 240 
days in that year.  
 
Therefore, only 75 employees employed on 1.4.2023 qualify as additional 
employees, and the total emoluments paid or payable to them during the 
P.Y.2023-24 is deemed to be the additional employee cost.  
(ii)  
As regards 100 regular employees employed on 1.9.2023, they would be 
treated as additional employees for previous year 2024-25, if they 
continue to be employees in that year for a minimum period of 240 days. 
Accordingly, 30% of additional employee cost in respect of such 
employees would be allowable as deduction under section 80JJAA in the 
hands of Mr. A for the A.Y. 2025-26.  
II 
If Mr. A is engaged in the business of manufacture of footwear 
 
If Mr. A is engaged in the business of manufacture of footwear, then, he would 
be entitled to deduction under section 80JJAA in respect of employee cost of 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.68 
regular employees employed on 1.9.2023, since they have been employed for 
more than 150 days in the previous year 2023-24. 
 
Additional employee cost = ` 2,16,00,000 + ` 24,000 × 7 × 100 = ` 3,84,00,000 
 
Deduction under section 80JJAA = 30% of ` 3,84,00,000 = ` 1,15,20,000. 
3.2 Deduction in respect of royalty income, etc., of authors 
of certain books other than text books [Section 80QQB] 
[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of 
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)] 
(i)
Eligible assessee & Quantum of deduction: Under section 80QQB, 
deduction of up to a maximum ` 3,00,000 is allowed to an individual resident 
in India in respect of income derived as author or joint author i.e., the 
deduction shall be the income derived as author or as joint author or  
` 3,00,000, whichever is less.  
(ii)
Eligible Income:  
(a)  
This income may be received either by way of a lumpsum consideration 
for the assignment or grant of any of his interests in the copyright of 
any book. 
(b) 
Such book should be a work of literary, artistic or scientific nature, or of 
royalties or copyright fees (whether receivable in lump sum or 
otherwise) in respect of such book.  
(c) 
This deduction shall not, however, be available in respect of royalty 
income from textbook for schools, guides, commentaries, brochures, 
diaries, magazines, newspapers, journals, pamphlets, tracts and other 
publications of similar nature.  
Note - Where an assessee claims deduction under this section, no deduction 
in respect of the same income may be claimed under any other provision of 
the Income-tax Act, 1961.  
(iii)
Manner of computation of deduction: For the purpose of calculating the 
deduction under this section, the amount of eligible income (royalty or 
copyright fee received otherwise than by way of lumpsum) before allowing 
expenses attributable to such income, shall not exceed 15% of the value of 
the books sold during the previous year.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.69 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
However, this condition is not applicable where the royalty or copyright fees 
is receivable in lump sum in lieu of all rights of the author in the book. 
(iv)
Conditions:  
(a)  Furnishing of certificate in prescribed form: For claiming the 
deduction, the assessee shall have to furnish a certificate in the 
prescribed manner in the prescribed format, duly verified by the person 
responsible for making such payment, setting forth such particulars as 
may be prescribed. 
(b) 
Period for repatriation of income earned outside India: Where the 
assessee earns any income from any source outside India, he should 
bring such income into India in convertible foreign exchange within a 
period of six months from the end of the previous year in which such 
income is earned or within such further period as the competent 
authority may allow in this behalf for the purpose of claiming deduction 
under this section. 
 
The competent authority shall mean the Reserve Bank of India or such 
other authority as is authorised under any law for the time being in 
force for regulating payments and dealings in foreign exchange. 
ILLUSTRATION  18 
Mr. Aakash earned royalty of ` 2,88,000 from a foreign country for a book authored 
by him, being a work of literary nature. The rate of royalty is 18% of value of books. 
The expenditure incurred by him for earning this royalty was ` 40,000. The amount 
remitted to India till 30th September, 2024 is ` 2,30,000. The remaining amount was 
not remitted till 31st March, 2025.  Compute the amount includible in the gross total 
income of Mr. Aakash and the amount of deduction which he will be eligible for under 
section 80QQB if he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime 
provided under section 115BAC(1A). 
SOLUTION 
The net royalty of ` 2,48,000 (i.e., royalty of ` 2,88,000 less ` 40,000, being 
expenditure to earn such income) is includible in gross total income. Deduction u/s 
80QQB would be ` 1,90,000 as calculated hereunder – 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.70 
Particulars 
` 
Royalty ` 2,88,000 x 15/18 = ` 2,40,000 
 
Restricted to  
 
Amount brought into India in convertible foreign exchange within 
the prescribed time 
 2,30,000  
Less: Expenses already allowed as deduction while computing 
royalty income 
 
  40,000 
Deduction u/s 80QQB 
1,90,000 
3.3 Deduction 
in 
respect 
of 
royalty 
on 
patents  
[Section 80RRB] 
[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of 
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)] 
(i) 
Eligible assessee: A resident individual who is registered as the true and first 
inventor in respect of an invention under the Patents Act, 1970, including the 
co-owner of the patent and earning income by way of royalty of a patent 
registered on or after 1.4.2003. 
(ii) 
Quantum of deduction: Income by way of royalty of a patent registered on 
or after 1.4.2003, subject to a maximum of ` 3 lakhs.    
Note - No deduction in respect of such income will be allowed under any 
other provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961 
(iii) Eligible income: This exemption shall be restricted to the royalty income 
including consideration for transfer of rights in the patent or for providing 
information for working or use of a patent, use of a patent or the rendering 
of any services in connection with these activities.  
 
The exemption shall not be available on any consideration for sale of product 
manufactured with the use of the patented process or patented article for 
commercial use.  
(iv) Conditions: In respect of any such income which is earned from sources 
outside India, the deduction shall be restricted to such sum as is brought to 
India in convertible foreign exchange within a period of 6 months from the end 
of the previous year in which such income is earned or extended period as is 
allowed by the competent authority (Reserve Bank of India). For claiming this 
deduction the assessee shall be required to furnish a certificate in the 
prescribed form signed by the prescribed authority. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.71 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
4. 
DEDUCTION IN RESPECT OF OTHER INCOME 
4.1 Deduction in respect of interest on deposits in savings 
accounts [Section 80TTA] 
[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out 
of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)] 
(i)
Eligible assessee and Quantum of deduction: Section 80TTA provides that 
in case the gross total income of an assessee, being an individual or a Hindu 
Undivided Family, includes any income by way of an interest on deposits in a 
saving account (not being time deposits, which are deposits repayable on 
expiry of fixed periods), deduction up to ` 10,000 in aggregate shall be 
allowed while computing the total income of such assessee. Such deduction 
shall be allowed in case the saving account is maintained with: 
(1)
a banking company to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, applies 
(including any bank or banking institution referred to in section 51 of 
that Act); 
(2)
a co-operative society engaged in carrying on the business of banking 
(including a co-operative land mortgage bank or a co-operative land 
development bank); or 
(3)
a post office. 
Deduction under this section would, however, not be available to 
a senior citizen eligible for deduction under section 80TTB. 
(ii)
Restrictions: If the aforesaid income is derived from any deposit in a savings 
account held by, or on behalf of, a firm, an AOP/BOI, no deduction shall be 
allowed in respect of such income in computing the total income of any 
partner of the firm or any member of the AOP or any individual of the BOI. 
 
In effect, the deduction under this section shall be allowed only in respect of 
the income derived in form of the interest on the saving bank deposit (other 
than time deposits) made by the individual or Hindu Undivided Family 
directly. 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.72 
4.2 Deduction in respect of interest on deposits in case of 
senior citizens [Section 80TTB] 
[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of 
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)] 
(i) 
Eligible assessee:  A senior citizen (a resident individual who is of the age of 
60 years or more at any time during the relevant previous year), whose gross 
total income includes income by way of interest on deposits (both fixed 
deposits and saving accounts) with – 
(a) 
a banking company to which Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies 
(b) 
a co-operative society engaged in carrying on the business of banking 
(including a co-operative land mortgage bank or a co-operative land 
development bank)  
(c) 
a Post Office. 
(ii) 
Quantum of deduction:  Actual amount of interest on deposits or  
` 50,000, whichever is lower. 
(iii) Non-availability of deduction to partner/member, where deposit held by 
firm/AOP/BOI: Where interest income is derived from any deposit held by, 
or on behalf of, a firm, an AOP or a BOI, the partner of the firm or member of 
AOP/BOI would not be allowed deduction in respect of such income while 
computing their total income.  
ILLUSTRATION 19 
Mr. A, a resident individual aged 61 years, has earned business income (computed) 
of ` 1,35,000, lottery income of ` 1,20,000 (gross) during the P.Y. 2023-24. He also 
has interest on Fixed Deposit of ` 30,000 with banks. He invested an amount of  
` 1,50,000 in Public Provident Fund account. What is the total income of Mr. A for 
the A.Y. 2024-25 if he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime 
provided under section 115BAC(1A)? 
SOLUTION
Computation of total income of Mr. A for A.Y.2024-25 
Particulars 
` 
` 
Profits and gains of business or profession 
 
1,35,000 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.73 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
Income from other sources  
 
 
- Interest on Fixed Deposit with banks 
 
30,000 
- lottery income 
 
1,20,000 
Gross Total Income 
 
2,85,000 
Less: Deductions under Chapter VIA [See Note below] 
 
 
 
Under section 80C 
 
 
 
- Deposit in Public Provident Fund 
1,50,000 
 
 
Under section 80TTB 
 
 
 
 - Interest on fixed deposits with banks  
30,000 
 
 
1,80,000 
 
Restricted to 
 
1,65,000 
Total Income 
 
1,20,000 
Note: In case of resident individuals of the age of 60 years or more, interest on bank 
fixed deposits qualifies for deduction upto ` 50,000 under section 80TTB. 
Though the aggregate of deductions under Chapter VI-A is ` 1,80,000, however, the 
maximum permissible deduction cannot exceed the gross total income exclusive of long 
term capital gains taxable under section 112 and section 112A, short-term capital gains 
covered under section 111A and winnings from lotteries of the assessee. 
Therefore, the maximum permissible deduction under Chapter VI-A = ` 2,85,000 –  
` 1,20,000 = ` 1,65,000. 
ILLUSTRATION 20 
Mr. Gurnam, aged 42 years, has salary income (computed) of ` 5,50,000 for the 
previous year ended 31.03.2024. He has earned interest of ` 14,500 on the saving 
bank account with State Bank of India during the year. Compute the total income of 
Mr. Gurnam for the assessment year 2024-25 from the following particulars, 
assuming he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime 
provided under section 115BAC(1A): 
(i) 
Life insurance premium paid to Birla Sunlife Insurance in cash amounting to  
` 25,000 for insurance of life of his dependent parents. The insurance policy 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.74 
was taken on 15.07.2020 and the sum assured on life of his dependent parents 
is ` 2,00,000. 
(ii) 
Life insurance premium of ` 19,500 paid for the insurance of life of his major 
son who is not dependent on him. The sum assured on life of his son is  
` 3,50,000 and the life insurance policy was taken on 30.3.2012. 
(iii) 
Life insurance premium paid by cheque of ` 22,500 for insurance of his life. The 
insurance policy was taken on 08.09.2019 and the sum assured is  
` 2,00,000. 
(iv)  Premium of ` 26,000 paid by cheque for health insurance of self and his wife. 
(v) 
` 1,500 paid in cash for his health check-up and ` 4,500 paid in cheque for 
preventive health check-up for his parents, who are senior citizens. 
(vi) 
Paid interest of ` 6,500 on loan taken from bank for MBA course pursued by his 
daughter. 
(vii) A sum of ` 5,000 donated in cash to an institution approved for purpose of 
section 80G for promoting family planning. 
SOLUTION 
Computation of total income of Mr. Gurnam for the  
Assessment Year 2024-25 
Particulars 
` 
` 
` 
Income from salary
5,50,000 
Interest on saving bank deposit 
   14,500 
Gross Total Income
5,64,500 
Less: Deduction under Chapter VIA
Under section 80C (See Note 1) 
-
major son
19,500
-  
self ` 22,500 restricted to 10% of ` 2,00,000 
20,000 
39,500 
Under section 80D (See Note 2)
Premium paid for ` 26,000 health insurance of 
self and wife by cheque, restricted to 
 
25,000 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.75 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
Payment made for health check-up for parents 
 4,500 
29,500 
Under section 80E 
 
 
For payment of interest on loan taken from bank 
for MBA course of his daughter 
 
6,500 
Under section 80TTA (See Note 4) 
 
 
Interest on savings bank account ` 14,500 
restricted to 
 
10,000 
  85,500
Total Income 
 
 
4,79,000 
Notes:
(1) 
As per section 80C, no deduction is allowed in respect of premium paid for 
life insurance of parents, whether they are dependent or not. Therefore, no 
deduction is allowable in respect of ` 25,000 paid as premium for life 
insurance of dependent parents of Mr. Gurnam. 
 
In respect of insurance policy issued on or after 01.04.2012, deduction shall 
be allowed for life insurance premium paid only to the extent of 10% of sum 
assured. In case the insurance policy is issued before 01.04.2012, deduction 
of premium paid on life insurance policy shall be allowed up to 20% of sum 
assured. 
Therefore, in the present case, deduction of ` 19,500 is allowable in full in 
respect of life insurance of Mr. Gurnam’s son since the insurance policy was 
issued before 01.04.2012 and the premium amount is less than 20% of  
` 3,50,000. However, in respect of premium paid for life insurance policy of 
Mr. Gurnam himself, deduction is allowable only up to 10% of ` 2,00,000 
since, the policy was issued on or after 01.04.2012 and the premium amount 
exceeds 10% of sum assured. 
(2)  
As per section 80D, in case the premium is paid in respect of health of a 
person specified therein and for health check-up of such person, deduction 
shall be allowed up to ` 25,000. Further, deduction up to ` 5,000 in aggregate 
shall be allowed in respect of health check-up of self, spouse, children and 
parents. In order to claim deduction under section 80D, the payment for 
health-checkup can be made in any mode including cash. However, the 
payment for health insurance premium has to be paid in any mode other than 
cash. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.76 
Therefore, in the present case, in respect of premium of ` 26,000 paid for 
health insurance of self and wife, deduction would be restricted to  
` 25,000. Since the limit of ` 25,000 has been exhausted against medical 
insurance premium, no deduction is allowable for preventive health check-up 
for self and wife. However, deduction of ` 4,500 is allowable in respect of 
health check-up of his parents, since it falls within the limit of ` 5,000.  
(3) 
No deduction shall be allowed under section 80G in case the donation is 
made in cash of a sum exceeding ` 2,000. Therefore, deduction under section 
80G is not allowable in respect of cash donation of ` 5,000 made to an 
institution approved for the purpose of section 80G for promotion of family 
planning.  
(4) 
As per section 80TTA, deduction shall be allowed from the gross total income 
of an individual or Hindu Undivided Family in respect of income by way of 
interest on deposit in the savings account included in the assessee’s gross 
total income, subject to a maximum of ` 10,000. Therefore, deduction of ` 
10,000 is allowable from the gross total income of Mr. Gurnam, though the 
interest from savings bank account is ` 14,500. 
5. 
OTHER DEDUCTIONS 
Deduction in the case of a person with disability  
[Section 80U] 
[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the 
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)] 
(i)  
Section 80U harmonizes the criteria for defining disability as existing under 
the Income-tax Rules with the criteria prescribed under the Persons with 
Disability (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) 
Act, 1995. 
(ii) 
Eligible assessee: This section is applicable to a resident individual, who, at 
any time during the previous year, is certified by the medical authority to be 
a person with disability. 
 
The benefit of deduction under this section is also available to persons 
suffering from autism, cerebral palsy and multiple disabilities. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.77 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
(iii) Quantum of deduction: A deduction of ` 75,000 in respect of a person with 
disability and ` 1,25,000 in respect of a person with severe disability (having 
disability over 80%) is allowable under this section. 
(iv) Conditions:  
(a) 
The assessee claiming a deduction under this section shall furnish a 
copy of the certificate issued by the medical authority in the form and 
manner, as may be prescribed, along with the return of income under 
section 139, in respect of the assessment year for which the deduction 
is claimed.  
(b) 
Where the condition of disability requires reassessment, a fresh 
certificate from the medical authority shall have to be obtained after 
the expiry of the period mentioned on the original certificate in order 
to continue to claim the deduction. 
6. 
DEDUCTION UNDER SECTION 10AA 
A deduction of profits and gains which are derived by an assessee being an 
entrepreneur from the export of articles or things or providing any service, shall be 
allowed from the total income of the assessee.  
In case of an individual, HUF, AoP (other than a co-operative society) or BoI or an 
artificial juridical person, deduction would be available only if they have exercised 
the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 
115BAC(1A). The deduction would be available only under the optional tax regime, 
where they pay tax under the normal provisions of the Act.  
In case of companies and co-operative societies, deduction would not be available if 
they opt for the special provisions u/s 115BAA/ 115BAB and section 115BAD/ 
115BAE, respectively.  The deduction would be available if they pay tax under the 
normal provisions of the Act.  
(1) 
Assessees who are eligible for exemption 
 
Exemption is available to all categories of assessees who derive any profits or 
gains from an undertaking, being a unit, engaged in the manufacturing or 
production of articles or things or provision of any service. Such assessee 
should be an entrepreneur referred to in section 2(j) of the SEZ Act, 2005 i.e., 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.78 
a person who has been granted a letter of approval by the Development 
Commissioner under section 15(9) of the said Act. 
(2)  Essential conditions to claim exemption 
The exemption shall apply to an undertaking which fulfils the following 
conditions: 
(i) 
It has begun to manufacture or produce articles or things or provide 
any service in any SEZ during the previous year relevant to A.Y.2006-07 
or any subsequent assessment year but not later than A.Y.2020-21. 
However, in case where letter of approval, required to be issued in 
accordance with the provisions of the SEZ Act, 2005, has been issued 
on or before 31st March, 2020 and the manufacture or production of 
articles or things or providing services has not begun on or before 31st 
March, 2020 then, the date for manufacture or production of articles or 
things 
or 
providing 
services 
has 
been 
extended 
to  
31st March, 2021 or such other date after 31st March, 2021, as notified 
by the Central Government. 
For e.g. If the SEZ unit has received the necessary approval by 31.3.2020 
and begins manufacture or production of articles or things or providing 
services on or before 31st March, 2021, then it would be deemed to 
have begun manufacture or production of articles or things or 
providing services during the A.Y. 2020-21 and would be eligible for 
exemption under section 10AA. [The Taxation and Other Laws 
(Relaxation of Certain Provisions) Act, 2020]   
(ii) 
The assessee should furnish in the prescribed form, before the date 
specified in section 44AB i.e., one month prior to the due date for 
furnishing return of income u/s 139(1), the report of a chartered 
accountant certifying that the deduction has been correctly claimed. 
(iii) 
No deduction under section 10AA would be allowed to an assessee who 
does not furnish a return of income on or before the due date specified 
u/s 139(1). 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

6.79 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
Example : An individual, subject to tax audit u/s 44AB, claiming 
deduction u/s 10AA is required to furnish return of income on or before 
31.10.2024 for A.Y. 2024-25 and the report of a chartered accountant 
before 30.9.2024, certifying the deduction claimed u/s 10AA. 
(iv)
Deduction under section 10AA would be available to a Unit, if the
proceeds from sale of goods or provision of services is received in, or
brought into, India by the assessee in convertible foreign exchange, within
a period of 6 months from the end of the previous year or, within such
further period as the competent authority may allow in this behalf.
The export proceeds from sale of goods or provision of services shall be
deemed to have been received in India where such export turnover is
credited to a separate account maintained for that purpose by the
assessee with any bank outside India with the approval of the Reserve
Bank of India.
Meaning of Competent authority – Competent authority means RBI or
such authority as is authorized under any law for the time being in force
for regulating payments and dealings in foreign exchange.
(3)
Period for which deduction is available
The unit of an entrepreneur, which begins to manufacture or produce any
article or thing or provide any service in a SEZ on or after 1.4.2005, shall be
allowed a deduction of:
(i)
100% of the profits and gains derived from the export, of such articles
or things or from services for a period of 5 consecutive assessment
years beginning with the assessment year relevant to the previous year
in which the Unit begins to manufacture or produce such articles or
things or provide services, and
(ii)
50% of such profits and gains for further 5 assessment years.
(iii)
So much of the amount not exceeding 50% of the profit as is debited
to the profit and loss account of the previous year in respect of which
the deduction is to be allowed and credited to a reserve account (to be
called the "Special Economic Zone Re-investment Reserve Account") to
be created and utilised in the manner laid down under section 10AA(2)
for next 5 consecutive years.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW
 
6.80 
However, Explanation below section 10AA(1) clarified that amount of 
deduction under section 10AA shall be allowed from the total income of the 
assessee computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act before giving 
effect to the provisions of this section and the deduction under section 10AA 
shall not exceed such total income of the assessee. 
Example : 
An undertaking is set up in a SEZ and begins manufacturing on 15.10.2009. 
The deduction under section 10AA shall be allowed as under:
(a)
100% of profits of such undertaking from exports from A.Y.2010-11 to
A.Y.2014-15.
(b)
50% of profits of such undertaking from exports from A.Y.2015-16 to A.Y.
2019-20.
(c)
50% of profits of such undertaking from exports from A.Y.2020-21 to
A.Y.2024-25 provided certain conditions are satisfied.
(4)
Conditions to be satisfied for claiming deduction for further 5 years
(after 10 years) [Section 10AA(2)]
Sub-section (2) provides that the deduction under (3)(iii) above shall be
allowed only if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:-
(a)
the amount credited to the Special Economic Zone Re-investment
Reserve Account is utilised-
(1)
for the purposes of acquiring machinery or plant which is first put
to use before the expiry of a period of three years following the
previous year in which the reserve was created; and
(2)
until the acquisition of the machinery or plant as aforesaid, for the
purposes of the business of the undertaking.  However, it should
not be utilized for
(i)
distribution by way of dividends or profits; or
(ii)
for remittance outside India as profits; or
(iii)
for the creation of any asset outside India;
(b)
the particulars, as may be specified by the CBDT in this behalf, have
been furnished by the assessee in respect of machinery or plant. Such
particulars include details of the new plant/machinery, name and
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.81 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
address of the supplier of the new plant/machinery, date of acquisition 
and date on which new plant/machinery was first put to use.  Such 
particulars have to be furnished along with the return of income for the 
assessment year relevant to the previous year in which such plant or 
machinery was first put to use.  
(5) 
Consequences of mis-utilisation/ non-utilisation of reserve [Section 
10AA(3)] 
 
Where any amount credited to the Special Economic Zone Re-investment 
Reserve Account - 
(a) 
has been utilised for any purpose other than those referred to in sub-
section (2), the amount so utilized shall be deemed to be the profits in 
the year in which the amount was so utilised and charged to tax 
accordingly; or  
(b) 
has not been utilised before the expiry of the said period of 3 years, the 
amount not so utilised, shall be deemed to be the profits in the year 
immediately following the said period of three years and be charged to 
tax accordingly.  
(6) 
Computation of profits and gains from exports of such undertakings
The profits derived from export of articles or things or services (including 
computer software) shall be the amount which bears to the profits of the 
business of the undertaking, being the unit, the same proportion as the 
export turnover in respect of such articles or things or services bears to the 
total turnover of the business carried on by the undertaking i.e.  
Profits of Unit in SEZ x 
Export turnover of Unit SEZ
Total turnover of Unit SEZ
 
 
Clarification on issues relating to export of computer software 
 
Section 10AA provides deduction to assessees who derive any profits and 
gains from export of articles or things or services (including computer 
software) from the year in which the Unit begins to manufacture or produce 
such articles or things or provide services, as the case may be, subject to 
fulfillment of the prescribed conditions. The profits and gains derived from 
the on site development of computer software (including services for 
development of software) outside India shall be deemed to be the profits and 
gains derived from the export of computer software outside India. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.82 
Meaning of Export turnover: It means the consideration in respect of export 
by the undertaking being the unit of articles or things or services received in 
India or brought into India by the assessee in convertible foreign exchange 
within 6 months from the end of the previous year or within such further 
period as the competent authority may allow in this behalf. 
However, it does not include 
- 
freight 
- 
telecommunication charges 
- 
insurance 
 
attributable to the delivery of the articles or things outside India or expenses 
incurred in foreign exchange in rendering of services (including computer 
software) outside India. 
Clarification on issues relating to deduction of freight, 
telecommunication charges and other expenses from total 
turnover 
"Export turnover", inter alia, does not include freight, telecommunication 
charges or insurance attributable to the delivery of the articles or things 
outside India or expenses, if any, incurred in foreign exchange in rendering 
of services (including computer software) outside India. 
CBDT has, vide circular No. 4/2018, dated 14/08/2018, clarified that freight, 
telecommunication charges and insurance expenses are to be excluded 
both from "export turnover" and "total turnover', while working out 
deduction admissible under section 10AA to the extent they are 
attributable to the delivery of articles or things outside India. 
Similarly, expenses incurred in foreign exchange for rendering services 
outside India are to be excluded from both "export turnover" and "total 
turnover" while computing deduction admissible under section 10AA. 
(7) 
Restriction on other tax benefits 
(i) 
The business loss under section 72(1) or loss under the head “Capital 
Gains” under section 74(1), in so far as such loss relates to the business 
of the undertaking, being the Unit shall be allowed to be carried forward 
or set off.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.83 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
(ii) 
During the period of deduction, depreciation is deemed to have been 
allowed on the assets. Written Down Value shall accordingly be 
reduced. 
(iii) 
No deduction under section 80-IA and 80-IB7 shall be allowed in 
relation to the profits and gains of the undertaking.  
(iv) 
Where any goods or services held for the purposes of eligible business 
are transferred to any other business carried on by the assessee, or 
where any goods held for any other business are transferred to the 
eligible business and, in either case, if the consideration for such 
transfer as recorded in the accounts of the eligible business does not 
correspond to the market value thereof, then the profits eligible for 
deduction shall be computed by adopting market value of such goods 
or services on the date of transfer. In case of exceptional difficulty in 
this regard, the profits shall be computed by the Assessing Officer on a 
reasonable basis as he may deem fit.  Similarly, where due to the close 
connection between the assessee and the other person or for any other 
reason, it appears to the Assessing Officer that the profits of eligible 
business is increased to more than the ordinary profits, the Assessing 
Officer shall compute the amount of profits of such eligible business on 
a reasonable basis for allowing the deduction. 
(v) 
Where a deduction under this section is claimed and allowed in relation 
to any specified business eligible for investment-linked deduction 
under section 35AD, no deduction shall be allowed under section 35AD 
in relation to such specified business for the same or any other 
assessment year. 
(8) 
Deduction allowable in case of amalgamation and demerger 
In the event of any undertaking, being the Unit which is entitled to deduction 
under this section, being transferred, before the expiry of the period specified 
in this section, to another undertaking, being the Unit in a scheme of 
amalgamation or demerger, -  
(a) 
no deduction shall be admissible under this section to the 
amalgamating or the demerged Unit for the previous year in which the 
amalgamation or the demerger takes place; and  
7 Deduction under section sections 80-IA and 80-IB are dealt with at Final Level 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.84 
(b) 
the provisions of this section would apply to the amalgamated or 
resulting Unit, as they would have applied to the amalgamating or the 
demerged Unit had the amalgamation or demerger had not taken place. 
ILLUSTRATION 21 
Mr. Y furnishes you the following information for the year ended 31.3.2024: 
Particulars 
` (in lacs)  
Total turnover of Unit A located in Special Economic Zone 
100  
Profit of the business of Unit A  
30  
Export turnover of Unit A received in India in convertible foreign 
exchange on or before 30.9.2024 
50  
Total turnover of Unit B located in Domestic Tariff Area (DTA) 
200  
Profit of the business of Unit B 
20  
Compute deduction under section 10AA for the A.Y. 2024-25, assuming that Mr. Y 
commenced operations in SEZ and DTA in the year 2019-20 and Mr. Y has exercised the 
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). 
SOLUTION 
100% of the profit derived from export of articles or things or services is eligible 
for deduction under section 10AA, since F.Y. 2023-24 falls within the first five year 
period commencing from the year of manufacture or production of articles or 
things or provision of services by the Unit in SEZ. As per section 10AA(7), the profit 
derived from export of articles or things or services shall be the amount which bears 
to the profits of the business of the undertaking, being the Unit, the same 
proportion as the export turnover in respect of articles or things or services bears 
to the total turnover of the business carried on by the undertaking. 
Deduction under section 10AA  
= 
Profit of the business of Unit A x 
Export Turnover of Unit A
Total Turnover of Unit A
x 100% 
= 
` 30 lakhs x 
x 100% = ` 15 lakhs 
Note – No deduction under section 10AA is allowable in respect of profits of 
business of Unit B located in DTA. 
100
50
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.85 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
Deductions in respect of certain payments 
Section 
Eligible 
Assessee 
Eligible Payments 
Permissible Deduction 
80C 
Individual 
or HUF 
Contribution 
to 
PPF, 
Payment 
of 
LIC 
premium, etc.  
Sums paid or deposited in 
the previous year by way of 
- 
Life 
insurance 
premium 
-  
Contribution to PPF/ 
SPF/ 
RPF 
and 
approved 
superannuation fund 
-  
Repayment 
of 
housing loan taken 
from Govt., bank, LIC, 
specified 
employer 
etc.
-  
Tuition fees to any 
Indian 
university, 
college, 
school 
for 
full-time education of 
any two children
-  
Term deposit for a 
fixed period of not 
less than 5 years with 
schedule bank
-  
Subscription 
to 
notified 
bonds 
of 
NABARD
-  
Five year post office 
time deposit
 
 
 
Sum paid or deposited, 
subject to a maximum of
` 1,50,000 
[Deduction would be 
available only if the 
individual/HUF exercises 
the option of shifting out 
of the default tax regime 
provided u/s 115BAC(1A)] 
 
LET US RECAPITULATE 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW
 
6.86 
-
Senior 
Citizen’s
Savings 
Scheme
Account etc.
-
Contribution 
by
Central 
Govt.
employee 
to
additional 
account 
(Tier II A/c) of NPS 
referred to u/s 80CCD
80CCC 
Individual 
Contribution to certain 
pension funds 
Any 
amount 
paid 
or 
deposited to keep in force 
a contract for any annuity 
plan of LIC of India or any 
other insurer for receiving 
pension from the fund.
Amount paid or deposited, 
subject to a maximum of 
` 1,50,000 
[Deduction would be 
available only if the 
individual exercises the 
option of shifting out of 
the default tax regime 
provided u/s 115BAC(1A)] 
80CCD
Individuals 
employed 
by 
the 
Central 
Govt or any 
other 
employer; 
Any other 
individual 
assessee.
Contribution to Pension 
Scheme 
of 
Central 
Government 
An individual employed 
by 
the 
Central 
Government on or after 
1.1.2004 or any other 
employer or any other 
assessee, 
being 
an 
individual, who has paid 
or deposited any amount 
in his account under a 
notified pension scheme 
[to his individual pension 
account [Tier I A/c] under 
National Pension Scheme 
& Atal Pension Yojana]
Employee’s Contribution/ 
Individual’ Contribution 
In 
case 
of 
a 
salaried 
individual, deduction of own 
contribution u/s 80CCD(1) is 
restricted to 10% of his 
salary. 
In any other case, deduction 
u/s 80CCD(1) is restricted to 
20% of gross total income. 
Further, 
additional 
deduction of upto ` 50,000 
is available u/s 80CCD(1B). 
[Deduction u/s 80CCD(1) 
and 80CCD(1B) would be 
available 
only 
if 
the 
individual 
exercises 
the 
option of shifting out of the 
default tax regime provided 
u/s 115BAC(1A)] 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

6.87 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
Employer’s Contribution 
The 
entire 
employer’s 
contribution 
would 
be 
included in the salary of the 
employee. The deduction of 
employer’s 
contribution 
under 
section 
80CCD(2) 
would be restricted to 14% 
of 
salary, 
where 
the 
employer is the Central 
Government 
or 
State 
Government; and 10%, in 
case of any other employer. 
[Deduction u/s 80CCD(2) 
would 
be 
available 
irrespective of the regime 
under which he pays tax.] 
Note – As per section 80CCE, maximum permissible deduction u/s 80C, 80CCC 
& 80CCD(1) is ` 1,50,000. However, the limit ` 1.50 lakh under section 80CCE 
does not apply to deduction under section 80CCD(2) and 80CCD(1B).
80CCH 
Individual 
Contribution 
to 
Agniveer Corpus Fund 
An individual enrolled in 
the Agnipath Scheme and 
subscribing 
to 
the 
Agniveer Corpus Fund on 
or after 1.11.2022, who 
has paid or deposited any 
amount in his account in 
the Agniveer Corpus Fund 
Individual’ Contribution 
Whole of the amount paid 
or deposited 
[Deduction 
would 
be 
available 
only 
if 
the 
individual
exercises 
the 
option of shifting out of the 
default tax regime provided 
under section 115BAC(1A)] 
Central 
Government’s 
Contribution 
The 
entire 
Central 
Government’s contribution 
to the Agniveer Corpus 
Fund would be included in 
the salary of the assessee. 
Thereafter, deduction u/s 
80CCH(2) 
would 
be 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW
 
6.88 
available for the same.
[Deduction u/s 80CCH(2) 
would 
be 
available 
irrespective of the regime 
under which he pays tax]
80D 
Individual 
and HUF 
Medical 
Insurance 
Premium 
(1) Any 
premium 
paid,
otherwise than by way
of cash, to keep in
force an insurance on
the health of –
in case of 
an 
individual 
self, 
spouse 
and 
dependent 
children 
in case of 
HUF 
family 
member
(2) In case of an individual,
contribution, otherwise
than by way of cash, to
CGHS or any other
scheme as notified by
Central Government.
Maximum ` 25,000 
(` 50,000, in case the 
individual or his or her 
spouse is a senior 
citizen)
(3) Any 
premium 
paid,
otherwise than by way of 
cash, to keep in force an
insurance on the health
of parents, whether or
not dependent on the
individual.
Notes: 
(i) Any 
amount 
paid,
otherwise than by way
of cash, on account of
medical 
expenditure 
Maximum 
` 
25,000 
(` 50,000, in case either 
or both of the parents 
are senior citizen(s))
Amount paid subject to a 
cap of ` 50,000 (in case one 
parent is a senior citizen, in 
respect of whom insurance 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

6.89 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
incurred on the health 
of the assessee or his 
family member or his 
parent, who is a senior 
citizen and no amount 
has been paid to effect 
or to keep in force an 
insurance 
on 
the 
health of such person. 
(ii) Payment, 
including
cash 
payment, 
for
preventive 
health 
check up of himself,
spouse, 
dependent
children and parents.
premium is paid, and the 
other is a senior citizen on 
whom medical expenditure 
is 
incurred, 
the 
total 
deduction cannot exceed 
` 50,000)
Amount paid subject to a 
cap of ` 5,000, in aggregate 
(subject 
to 
the 
overall 
individual 
limits 
of 
` 25,000/ ` 50,000, as the 
case may be) 
[Deduction 
would 
be 
available 
only 
if 
the 
individual/HUF 
exercises 
the option of shifting out of 
the 
default 
tax regime 
provided u/s 115BAC(1A)]
80DD 
Resident 
Individual 
or HUF 
Maintenance 
including 
medical treatment of a 
dependant disabled 
Any amount incurred for 
the 
medical 
treatment 
(including 
nursing), 
training and rehabilitation 
of a dependent disabled 
and / or 
Any 
amount 
paid 
or 
deposited 
under 
the 
scheme framed in this 
behalf by the LIC or any 
other 
insurer 
or 
Administrator or Specified 
Company and approved 
by Board. 
Flat 
deduction 
of 
` 75,000. 
In case of severe disability 
(i.e. person with 80% or 
more disability) the flat 
deduction 
shall 
be 
` 1,25,000. 
[Deduction 
would 
be 
available 
only 
if 
the 
individual/HUF 
exercises 
the option of shifting out of 
the 
default 
tax regime 
provided u/s 115BAC(1A)]
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW
 
6.90 
Meaning of Dependant 
(1) 
In case of 
(2) 
Dependant 
An 
individual 
Spouse, 
children, 
parents, 
brothers, 
sisters
A HUF 
Any member 
Persons 
mentioned 
in 
column 
(2) 
should 
be
wholly 
or 
mainly 
dependant on the person 
mentioned 
in
corresponding column (1) 
for 
support 
and 
maintenance. Such persons 
should not have claimed 
deduction under section 
80U in computing total 
income of that year. 
80DDB 
Resident 
Individual 
or HUF 
Deduction for medical 
treatment of specified 
diseases or ailments 
Amount paid for specified 
diseases or ailment 
Assessee Amount spent 
An 
individual 
For himself or 
his dependant 
being spouse, 
children, 
parents, 
brothers 
or 
sisters wholly 
or 
mainly 
dependant on 
Actual 
sum 
paid 
or 
` 40,000 (` 1,00,000, if the 
payment 
is 
for 
medical 
treatment 
of 
a 
senior 
citizen), whichever is less,
minus 
the amount received from 
the insurance company or 
reimbursed by the employer. 
[Deduction 
would 
be 
available 
only 
if 
the 
individual/HUF exercises the 
option of shifting out of the 
default tax regime provided 
under section 115BAC(1A)]
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

6.91 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
the individual 
for 
support 
and 
maintenance 
A HUF 
For 
any 
member 
80E 
Individual 
Interest on loan taken 
for higher education 
Interest on loan taken 
from 
any 
financial 
institution or approved 
charitable institution. 
Such loan is taken for 
pursuing 
his 
higher 
education 
or 
higher 
education of his or her 
relative i.e., spouse or 
children of the individual 
or the student for whom 
the individual is the legal 
guardian. 
The deduction is available 
for interest payment in the 
initial 
assessment 
year 
(year of commencement of 
interest 
payment) 
and 
seven 
assessment 
years 
immediately 
succeeding 
the initial assessment year 
(or) 
until the interest is paid in 
full 
by 
the 
assessee, 
whichever is earlier. 
[Deduction 
would 
be 
available 
only 
if 
the 
individual 
exercises 
the 
option of shifting out of the 
default tax regime provided 
under section 115BAC(1A)] 
80EE 
Individuals Deduction for interest 
on loan borrowed from 
any financial institution 
[bank/housing 
finance 
company 
(HFC)] 
for 
acquisition of residential 
house property 
Deduction 
of 
upto 
` 50,000 would be allowed 
in respect of interest on 
loan taken from a financial 
institution (FI).  
Conditions: 
Loan should be sanctioned 
during P.Y.2016-17 
Loan 
sanctioned 
≤ 
` 35 lakhs
Value of house ≤ ` 50 lakhs
The assessee should not 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW
 
6.92 
own any residential house 
on the date of sanction of 
loan. 
[Deduction 
would 
be 
available 
only 
if 
the 
individual 
exercises 
the 
option of shifting out of the 
default tax regime provided 
under section 115BAC(1A)]
80EEA 
Individual 
Deduction in respect of 
interest payable on loan 
taken from a FI (bank or 
HFC) for acquisition of 
residential 
house 
property 
Deduction 
of 
upto 
` 
1,50,000 
would 
be 
allowed 
in 
respect 
of 
interest payable on loan 
taken 
from 
a 
FI 
for 
acquisition 
of 
house 
property. 
Conditions: 
•
Loan 
should 
be
sanctioned 
by 
a 
FI
during 
the 
period
between 1st April 2019 to
31st March 2022.
•
Stamp Duty Value of
house ≤ ` 45 lakhs
•
The individual should not
own 
any 
residential
house on the date of
sanction of loan.
•
The individual should
not be eligible to claim
deduction u/s 80EE.
[Deduction 
would 
be 
available 
only 
if 
the 
individual
exercises 
the 
option of shifting out of the 
default tax regime provided 
u/s 115BAC(1A)] 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

6.93 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
80EEB 
Individual 
Deduction in respect of 
interest payable on loan 
taken from a FI (bank or 
certain 
NBFCs) 
for 
purchase 
of 
electric 
vehicle 
Deduction 
of 
upto 
` 
1,50,000 
would 
be 
allowed 
in 
respect 
of 
interest payable on loan 
taken 
for 
purchase 
of 
electric vehicle. 
Loan should be sanctioned 
by a FI during the period 
from 1.4.2019 to 31.3.2023. 
[Deduction 
would 
be 
available 
only 
if 
the 
individual 
exercises 
the 
option of shifting out of the 
default tax regime provided 
u/s 115BAC(1A)] 
80G 
All 
assessees 
Donations to certain funds, charitable institutions etc. 
There are four categories of deductions – 
Category 
Donee 
(I) 
100% deduction 
of 
amount 
donated, 
without 
any 
qualifying limit 
Prime 
Minister’s 
National 
Relief 
Fund, 
National 
Children’s 
Fund, 
Swachh 
Bharat Kosh, National Defence 
Fund, PM CARES Fund etc.
(II) 
50% deduction 
of 
amount 
donated, 
without 
any 
qualifying limit 
Prime 
Minister’s 
Drought 
Relief Fund. 
(III) 
100% deduction 
of 
amount 
donated, subject 
to qualifying limit
Government 
or 
local 
authority, 
institution 
for 
promotion 
of 
family 
planning etc.
(IV) 
50% deduction 
of 
amount 
donated, 
subject 
to 
qualifying limit. 
Government 
or 
any 
local 
authority to be used for 
charitable purpose, other than 
promotion of family planning, 
notified 
temple, 
church, 
gurudwara, mosque etc.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW
 
6.94 
Calculation of Qualifying limit for Category III & IV 
donations: 
Step 1: Compute adjusted total income, i.e., the gross 
total income as reduced by the following: 
1. 
Deductions under Chapter VI-A, except u/s 80G 
2. 
Short term capital gains taxable u/s 111A 
3.
Long term capital gains taxable u/s 112 & 112A
Step 2: Calculate 10% of adjusted total income. 
Step 3: Calculate the actual donation, which is subject 
to qualifying limit 
Step 4: Lower of Step 2 or Step 3 is the maximum 
permissible deduction. 
Step 5: The said deduction is adjusted first against 
donations qualifying for 100% deduction (i.e., Category 
III donations). Thereafter, 50% of balance qualifies for 
deduction under section 80G. 
Note - No deduction shall be allowed for donation in 
excess of ` 2,000, if paid in cash. 
[In case of individuals, HUF, AoP (other than a co-
operative society) or BoI or an artificial juridical person, 
deduction would be available only if they exercise the 
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided 
under section 115BAC(1A)] 
80GG 
Individual 
not 
in 
receipt of 
house rent 
allowance 
Rent 
paid 
for 
residential 
accommodation 
Least of the following is 
allowable as deduction: 
(1) 25% of total income;
(2) Rent paid – 10% of total
income 
(3) ` 5,000 p.m.
No 
deduction 
if 
any
residential accommodation is
owned by the assessee/his
spouse/minor child/HUF at
the place where he ordinarily
resides 
or 
performs 
the
duties 
of 
his 
office 
or
employment or carries on his
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

6.95 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
business or profession. 
[Deduction 
would 
be 
available 
only 
if 
the 
individual 
exercises 
the 
option of shifting out of the 
default tax regime provided 
under section 115BAC(1A)]
80GGA 
Any 
assessee 
not having 
income 
chargeable 
under the 
head 
“Profits and 
gains 
of 
business or 
profession” 
Donations 
for 
scientific research and 
rural development 
Actual donation 
[No 
deduction 
shall 
be 
allowed for donation in excess 
of ` 2,000, if paid in cash] 
[Deduction would be available 
to individual, HUF, AoP (other 
than a co-operative society) or 
BoI or an artificial juridical 
person only if they exercise 
the option of shifting out of 
the 
default 
tax 
regime 
provided u/s 115BAC(1A)] 
80GGB 
Indian 
company 
(not 
opting for 
section 
115BAA/ 
115BAB) 
Contributions 
to 
political parties 
Any sum contributed by 
it 
to 
a 
registered 
political party or an 
electoral trust. 
Actual contribution 
(otherwise than by way of 
cash) 
80GGC 
Any 
person, 
other than 
local 
authority 
and 
an 
artificial 
juridical 
person 
funded by 
the 
Government. 
Contributions 
to 
political parties 
Amount contributed to a 
registered political party 
or an electoral trust. 
Actual contribution 
(otherwise than by way of 
cash) 
[An 
individual, 
HUF, 
AoP 
(other than a co-operative 
society) or BoI would be 
eligible for deduction u/s 
80GGC only if the assessee 
exercise the option of shifting 
out of the default tax regime 
provided u/s 115BAC(1A)] 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW
 
6.96 
Deductions in respect of Certain Incomes 
As per section 80AC, furnishing return of income on or before due date is 
mandatory for claiming deduction in respect of certain incomes. 
Section 
Eligible 
Assessee 
Eligible Income 
Permissible Deduction 
80JJAA 
An 
assessee 
to whom 
section 
44AB 
applies, 
whose 
Gross 
total 
income 
includes 
profits 
and gains 
derived 
from 
business 
Deduction in respect of 
employment 
of 
new 
employees 
30% of additional employee 
cost incurred in the previous 
year. 
Deduction is allowable for 3 
assessment years including 
assessment year relevant to 
the previous year in which 
such 
employment 
is 
provided. 
[Deduction 
would 
be 
available irrespective of the 
regime 
under 
which 
the 
employer pays tax]
80QQB 
Resident 
individual, 
being an 
author 
Royalty income, etc., of 
authors of certain books 
other than text books 
Consideration 
for 
assignment or grant of 
any of his interests in the 
copyright of any book, 
being a work of literary, 
artistic or scientific nature 
or royalty or copyright fee 
received as lumpsum or 
otherwise. 
Income 
derived 
in 
the 
exercise of profession or 
` 3,00,000, whichever is less. 
In respect of royalty or 
copyright 
fee 
received 
otherwise than by way of 
lumpsum, 
income 
to 
be 
restricted to 15% of value of 
books 
sold 
during 
the 
relevant previous year. 
[Deduction 
would 
be 
available 
only 
if 
the 
individual 
exercises 
the 
option of shifting out of the 
default tax regime provided 
under section 115BAC(1A)]
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

6.97 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
80RRB 
Resident 
individual, 
being 
a 
patentee 
Royalty on patents 
Any income by way of 
royalty 
on 
patents 
registered on or after 
1.4.2003 
Whole of such income or 
` 3,00,000, whichever is less. 
[Deduction 
would 
be 
available 
only 
if 
the 
individual 
exercises 
the 
option of shifting out of the 
default tax regime provided 
u/s 115BAC(1A)] 
Deductions in respect of Other Income
Section 
Eligible 
Assessee 
Eligible Income 
Permissible Deduction 
80TTA 
Individual 
or a HUF, 
other 
than 
a 
resident 
senior 
citizen 
Interest on deposits in 
savings account 
Interest on deposits in a 
savings account with a 
bank, 
a 
co-operative 
society or a post office 
(not being time deposits, 
which are repayable on 
expiry of fixed periods) 
Actual interest subject to a 
maximum of ` 10,000. 
[Deduction 
would 
be 
available 
only 
if 
the 
individual/HUF exercises the 
option of shifting out of the 
default tax regime provided 
u/s 115BAC(1A)] 
80TTB 
Resident 
senior 
citizen 
(i.e. 
an 
individual 
of the age 
of 
60 
years 
or 
more 
at 
any time 
during 
the 
previous 
year) 
Interest on deposits 
Interest 
on 
deposits 
(both fixed deposits and 
saving accounts) with 
banking company, co-
operative 
society 
engaged in the business 
of banking or a post 
office. 
Actual 
interest 
or 
` 50,000, whichever is less. 
[Deduction 
would 
be 
available 
only 
if 
the 
individual 
exercises 
the 
option of shifting out of the 
default tax regime provided 
u/s 115BAC(1A)]
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW
6.98 
Other Deductions 
Section 
Eligible 
Assessee 
Condition for deduction 
Permissible Deduction 
80U 
Resident 
Individual 
Deduction in case of a 
person with disability 
Any 
person, 
who 
is 
certified by the medical 
authority to be a person 
with disability. 
Flat deduction of ` 75,000, in 
case 
of 
a 
person 
with 
disability.  
Flat 
deduction 
of 
` 1,25,000, in case of a 
person with severe disability 
(80% or more disability). 
[Deduction 
would 
be 
available 
only 
if 
the 
individual 
exercises 
the 
option of shifting out of the 
default tax regime provided 
u/s 115BAC(1A)] 
Deduction under section 10AA 
Section 
Eligible 
Assessee 
Eligible Income 
Permissible Deduction 
10AA 
An assessee 
who derives 
profits from 
an 
under-
taking, being 
a 
Unit 
established 
in SEZ, which 
begins 
to 
manufacture 
or 
produce 
articles 
or 
things 
or 
provide any 
service on or 
after 
Profits derived from 
exports 
of 
such 
articles or things or 
export 
of 
services 
(including computer 
software). 
Conditions 
for 
deduction 
1.
Proceeds 
to 
be
received 
in 
convertible foreign
exchange within 6
months from the
end of the P.Y. or
such further period
as the competent
Deduction for 15 consecutive 
assessment years 
Amount of deduction = 
Profits of Unit in SEZ x 
Export turnover of Unit SEZ
Total turnover of Unit SEZ
Years 1 to 5 - 100% of such 
profits would be exempt in 
the first five years; 
Years 6 to 10 - 50% of such 
profits in the next five years; 
and 
Years 11 to 15 - In the last 
five years, 50% of such 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.99 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
1.4.2005 but 
before 
1.4.2021 
authority 
may 
allow 
in 
this 
behalf.  
2.  The 
report 
of 
chartered 
accountant 
certifying that the 
deduction 
has 
been 
correctly 
claimed 
should 
be 
furnished 
before the
date 
specified 
in 
section 44AB. 
3.  Return of income 
to be filed on or 
before due date 
u/s 139(1). 
profits subject to transfer to 
SEZ Re-investment Reserve 
Account. 
[In case of individuals, HUF, 
AoP 
(other 
than 
a 
co-
operative society), BoI or an 
artificial 
juridical 
person, 
deduction would be available 
only if they exercise the 
option of shifting out of the 
default tax regime provided 
u/s 115BAC(1A)]
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.100 
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
1. 
Examine the following statements with regard to the provisions of the Income-
tax Act, 1961: 
(i) 
During the financial year 2023-24, Mr. Amit paid interest on loan availed 
by him for his son's higher education. His son is already employed in a 
firm. Mr. Amit will get the deduction under section 80E.  
(ii) 
Subscription to notified bonds of NABARD would qualify for deduction 
under section 80C.  
(iii)  In order to be eligible to claim deduction under section 80C, investment/ 
contribution/ subscription etc. in eligible or approved modes, should be 
made from out of income chargeable to tax. 
(iv)  Where an individual repays a sum of ` 30,000 towards principal and
` 14,000 as interest in respect of loan taken from a bank for pursuing 
eligible higher studies, the deduction allowable under section 80E is 
` 44,000 irrespective of the tax regime. 
(v) 
Mrs. Sheela, widow of Mr. Satish (who was an employee of M/s. XYZ Ltd.), 
received ` 7 lakhs on 1.5.2023, being amount standing to the credit of 
Mr. Satish in his NPS Account, in respect of which deduction has been 
allowed under section 80CCD to Mr. Satish in the earlier previous years. 
Such amount received by her as a nominee on closure of the account is 
deemed to be her income for A.Y.2024-25. 
(vi) 
Mr. Vishal, a Central Government employee, contributed ` 50,000 
towards Tier II account of NPS. The same would be eligible for deduction 
under section 80CCD. He has exercised the option of shifting out of the 
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). 
2. 
Examine the allowability of the following if the assessees have exercised the 
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 
115BAC(1A): 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.101 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
(i) 
Rajan, a resident individual, has to pay to a hospital for treatment 
` 62,000 and spent nothing for life insurance or for maintenance of 
dependent disabled. 
(ii) 
Varun, a resident Indian, has spent nothing for treatment in the previous 
year and deposited ` 25,000 with LIC for maintenance of dependant 
disabled. 
(iii) 
Hari, a resident individual, has incurred ` 20,000 for treatment and 
` 25,000 was deposited with LIC for maintenance of dependant disabled.
3. 
For the A.Y. 2024-25, the Gross total income of Mr. Chaturvedi, a resident in 
India, was ` 8,18,240 which includes long-term capital gain of ` 2,45,000 
taxable under section 112 and Short-term capital gain of ` 58,000. The Gross 
total income also includes interest income of ` 12,000 from savings bank 
deposits with banks and ` 40,000 interest on fixed deposits with banks.  
Mr. Chaturvedi has invested in PPF ` 1,20,000 and also paid a medical 
insurance premium ` 51,000. Mr. Chaturvedi also contributed ` 50,000 to 
Public Charitable Trust eligible for deduction under section 80G by way of an 
account payee cheque. Compute the total income and tax thereon of  
Mr. Chaturvedi, who is 70 years old as on 31.3.2024, in a tax efficient manner. 
4. 
Mr. Rajmohan whose gross total income was ` 6,40,000 for the financial year 
2023-24, furnishes you the following information: 
(i) 
Repayment of loan taken from SBI for acquisition of residential house 
(self-occupied) - ` 50,000. 
(ii) 
Five year post office time deposit - ` 20,000. 
(iii)  Donation to a recognized charitable trust ` 25,000 which is eligible for 
deduction under section 80G at the applicable rate. 
(iv) 
Interest on loan taken for higher education of spouse paid during the year 
- ` 10,000. 
Compute the total income of Mr. Rajmohan for the A.Y. 2024-25 if he has 
exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under 
section 115BAC(1A). 
5. 
Compute the eligible deduction under Chapter VI-A for the A.Y. 2024-25 of  
Ms. Roma, aged 40 years, who has a gross total income of ` 15,00,000 for the 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.102 
A.Y. 2024-25 and has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax 
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). She provides the following 
information about her investments/payments during the P.Y. 2023-24: 
Sl. 
No. 
Particulars 
Amount 
(` ) 
1.
Life Insurance premium paid (Policy taken on 31-03-
2012 and sum assured is ` 4,40,000) 
35,000 
2.
Public Provident Fund contribution 
1,50,000 
3.
Repayment of housing loan to Bhartiya Mahila Bank, 
Bangalore 
20,000 
4.
Payment to L.I.C. Pension Fund 
1,40,000 
5.
Mediclaim Policy taken for self, wife and dependent 
children, premium paid by cheque 
30,000 
6.
Medical Insurance premium paid by cheque for 
parents (Senior Citizens) 
52,000
6.
Mr. Rudra has one unit at Special Economic Zone (SEZ) and other unit at 
Domestic Tariff Area (DTA). He provides the following details for the previous 
year 2023-24. 
Particulars 
Mr. Rudra (`) 
Unit in DTA (`) 
Total Sales 
6,00,00,000 
2,00,00,000 
Export Sales 
5,60,00,000 
1,60,00,000 
Net Profit 
80,00,000 
20,00,000 
Proceeds from export sales in SEZ received in convertible foreign exchange by 
30.9.2024 is ` 3,00,00,000. He has exercised the option of shifting out of the 
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). Calculate the eligible 
deduction under section 10AA of the Income-tax Act, 1961, for the Assessment 
Year 2024-25, in the following situations: 
(i)
If both the units were set up and start manufacturing from  
22-05-2015. 
(ii)
If both the units were set up and start manufacturing from  
14-05-2019. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.103 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
ANSWERS 
1. 
(i) 
The statement is correct. The deduction under section 80E is available 
to an individual in respect of interest on loan taken for his higher 
education or for the higher education of his relative only if he exercises 
the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under 
section 115BAC(1A). For this purpose, relative means, inter alia, spouse 
and children of the individual. Therefore, Mr. Amit will get the deduction 
under section 80E in respect of interest on loan availed by him for his 
son’s higher education, if he exercises the option of shifting out of the 
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). It is immaterial 
that his son is already employed in a firm. This would not affect Mr. 
Amit’s eligibility for deduction under section 80E. 
 
(ii) 
The statement is correct. Under section 80C(2) subscription to such 
bonds issued by NABARD (as the Central Government may notify in the 
Official Gazette) would qualify for deduction under section 80C, if the 
assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax 
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). 
(iii) The statement is not correct. There is no stipulation under section 80C 
that the investment, subscription, etc. should be made from out of 
income chargeable to tax. 
(iv) The statement is not correct. An individual would not be eligible for 
deduction u/s 80E if he pays tax under default tax regime under section 
115BAC. If he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax 
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), deduction under section 
80E would be available in respect of interest paid on education loan. 
Hence, the deduction will be limited to interest of ` 14,000, if he has 
exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided 
under section 115BAC(1A). 
(v) 
The statement is not correct. The proviso to section 80CCD(3) 
provides that the amount received by the nominee, on closure of NPS 
account on the death of the assessee, shall not be deemed to be the 
income of the nominee. Hence, amount received by Mrs. Sheela would 
not be deemed to be her income for A.Y. 2024-25. 
(vi) The statement is not correct.  Contribution to Tier II account of NPS 
would qualify for deduction under section 80C and not section 80CCD. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW
 
6.104 
2.
(i) 
The deduction of ` 75,000 under section 80DD is allowable to Rajan,
irrespective of the amount of expenditure incurred or paid by him. If 
the expenditure is incurred in respect of a dependant with severe 
disability, the deduction allowable is ` 1,25,000. 
(ii)
The assessee Varun has deposited ` 25,000 for maintenance of
dependent disabled. He is, however, eligible to claim ` 75,000 since the
deduction of ` 75,000 is allowed, irrespective of the amount deposited
with LIC. In the case of dependant with severe disability, the deduction
allowable is ` 1,25,000.
(iii)
Section 80DD allows a deduction of ` 75,000 irrespective of the actual
amount spent on maintenance of a dependent disabled and/or actual
amount deposited with LIC. Therefore, the deduction will be ` 75,000
even though the total amount incurred/deposited is only ` 45,000. If
the dependant is a person with severe disability the quantum of
deduction is ` 1,25,000.
3.
Computation of total income and tax liability of
Mr. Chaturvedi for the A.Y. 2024-25 under default tax regime
Particulars 
`
Gross total income incl. long term capital gain
8,18,240 
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A
- 
No deduction would be available under default tax 
regime u/s 115BAC 
Total income
8,18,240
Tax on total income
LTCG ` 2,45,000 x 20%
49,000 
Balance total income ` 5,73,240 
13,662 
62,662 
Add: Health and Education cess @4%
 2,506 
Total tax liability
65,168 
Total tax liability (Rounded off) 
65,170 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.105 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
 
Computation of total income and tax liability of  
Mr. Chaturvedi for the A.Y. 2024-25 under the optional tax regime  
(i.e., the normal provisions of the Act) 
Particulars 
` 
` 
Gross total income incl. long term capital gain
8,18,240 
Less: Long term capital gain
2,45,000 
5,73,240 
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A
Under section 80C in respect of PPF deposit
1,20,000 
Under section 80D (it is assumed that premium of  
` 51,000 is paid by otherwise than by cash. The 
deduction would be restricted to ` 50,000, since
Mr. Chaturvedi is a senior citizen) 
50,000 
Under section 80G (See Notes 1 & 2 below) 
Under section 80TTB (See Note 3 below)
17,662 
50,000 
 
2,37,662 
Total income (excluding long term capital gains) 
 
3,35,578 
Total income (including long term capital gains) 
 
5,80,578 
Total income (rounded off) 
 
5,80,580 
Tax on total income (including long-term capital 
gains of ` 2,45,000) 
LTCG ` 2,45,000 x 20%
49,000 
Balance total income ` 3,35,580 (See Note 4 below) 
 
 
  1,779 
50,779 
Add: Health and Education cess @4%
  2,031 
Total tax liability 
 
52,810 
Since the tax liability is lower under the optional tax regime (i.e., normal 
provisions of the Act) as compared to the default tax regime, Mr. Chaturvedi 
should exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided 
under section 115BAC(1A). 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.106 
Notes: 
1. 
Computation of deduction under section 80G: 
 
Particulars 
` 
Gross total income (excluding long term capital gains) 
5,73,240 
Less : Deduction under section 80C, 80D & 80TTB  
2,20,000 
 
3,53,24
10% of the above  
 
35,324 
Contribution made 
 
 
50,000 
Lower of the two eligible for deduction under section 
35,324
Deduction under section 80G – 50% of ` 35,324
17,662
2. 
Deduction under section 80G is allowed only if amount is paid by any 
mode other than cash, in case of amount exceeding ` 2,000. Therefore, 
the contribution made to public charitable trust is eligible for deduction 
since it is made by way of an account payee cheque. 
3. 
Deduction of upto ` 50,000 under section 80TTB is allowed to a senior 
citizen if gross total income includes interest income on bank deposits, 
both fixed deposits and savings account. 
4. 
Mr. Chaturvedi, being a senior citizen is eligible for a higher basic 
exemption of ` 3,00,000. 
4. 
Computation of total income of Mr. Rajmohan for the A.Y.2024-25 
Particulars 
` 
` 
Gross Total Income
6,40,000 
Less:
Deduction under Chapter VI-A 
Under section 80C  
Repayment of loan taken for acquisition of 
residential house 
50,000 
Five year time deposit with Post Office  
20,000 
70,000 
Under section 80E 
Interest on loan taken for higher education of 
spouse, being a relative. 
10,000
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.107 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
Under section 80G (See Note below) 
Donation to recognized charitable trust  
(50% of ` 25,000) 
12,500
 
92,500 
Total Income 
 
5,47,500 
Note: In case of deduction under section 80G in respect of donation to a 
charitable trust, the net qualifying amount has to be restricted to 10% of adjusted 
total income, i.e., gross total income less deductions under Chapter VI-A except 
80G. The adjusted total income is, therefore, ` 5,60,000 (i.e. 6,40,000 – ` 80,000), 
10% of which is ` 56,000, which is higher than the actual donation of ` 25,000. 
Therefore, the deduction under section 80G would be ` 12,500, being 50% of the 
actual donation of ` 25,000. 
5. 
Computation of eligible deduction under Chapter VI-A of  
Ms. Roma for A.Y. 2024-25 
Particulars 
` 
` 
Deduction under section 80C 
 
Life insurance premium paid ` 35,000
(allowed in full since the same is within the limit of 
20% of the sum assured, the policy being taken 
before 1.4.2012)
35,000
Public Provident Fund
1,50,000
Repayment of housing loan to Bhartiya Mahila 
Bank, Bangalore
  20,000
2,05,000
Restricted to a maximum of ` 1,50,000 
1,50,000
 
Deduction under section 80CCC for payment 
towards LIC pension fund 
1,40,000
 
2,90,000
 
As per section 80CCE, aggregate deduction under, 
inter alia, section 80C and 80CCC, is restricted to  
 
1,50,000 
Deduction under section 80D 
 
Payment of medical insurance premium of ` 30,000 
towards medical policy taken for self, wife and 
dependent children restricted to 
25,000
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

INCOME TAX LAW 
 
6.108 
Medical insurance premium paid ` 52,000 for 
parents, being senior citizens, restricted to  
50,000
 
   75,000 
Eligible deduction under Chapter VI-A 
2,25,000 
6. 
Computation of deduction u/s 10AA of the Income-tax Act, 1961 
As per section 10AA, in computing the total income of Mr. Rudra from his 
unit located in a Special Economic Zone (SEZ), which begins to manufacture 
or produce articles or things or provide any services during the previous year 
relevant to the assessment year commencing on or after 01.04.2006 but 
before 01.04.2021, there shall be allowed a deduction of 100% of the profit 
and gains derived from export of such articles or things or from services for 
a period of five consecutive assessment years beginning with the assessment 
year relevant to the previous year in which the Unit begins to manufacture or 
produce such articles or things or provide services, as the case may be, and 
50% of such profits for further five assessment years. 
Since Mr.  Rudra has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax 
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), he would be eligible for 
deduction u/s 10AA. 
The deduction u/s 10AA would be available only if Mr. Rudra furnishes report 
of chartered accountant before the date specified in section 44AB and files 
return of income on or before due date u/s 139(1). 
Computation of eligible deduction under section 10AA: 
(i) 
If Unit in SEZ was set up and began manufacturing from  
22-05-2015: 
Since A.Y. 2024-25 is the 9th assessment year from A.Y. 2016-17, 
relevant to the previous year 2015-16, in which the SEZ unit began 
manufacturing of articles or things, it shall be eligible for deduction of 
50% of the profits derived from export of such articles or things, 
assuming all the other conditions specified in section 10AA are fulfilled. 
= Profits of Unit in 
SEZ
x 
Export turnover of Unit in 
SEZ
x 50% 
Total turnover of Unit in SEZ 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
6.109 
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME 
=  60 lakhs 
X 
300 lakhs
x  50% 
= ` 22.50 lakhs 
400 lakhs
Export turnover of Unit in SEZ is the export sales in SEZ received in 
convertible foreign exchange by 30.9.2024 which is ` 3,00,00,000. 
(ii) 
If Unit in SEZ was set up and began manufacturing from  
14-05-2019: 
 
Since A.Y. 2024-25 is the 5th assessment year from A.Y. 2020-21, 
relevant to the previous year 2019-20, in which the SEZ unit began 
manufacturing of articles or things, it shall be eligible for deduction of 
100% of the profits derived from export of such articles or things, 
assuming all the other conditions specified in section 10AA are fulfilled. 
= Profits of 
Unit in SEZ 
x 
SEZ
 
in
 
Unit
 
of
turnover 
 
Total
SEZ
 
in
 
Unit
 
of
turnover 
 
Export
 x  
100% 
=  60 lakhs 
x 
Lakhs
 
400
Lakhs
 
300
 x 100% = ` 45 lakhs 
 
 
The unit set up in Domestic Tariff Area is not eligible for the benefit of 
deduction u/s 10AA in respect of its export profits, in both the situations. 
Working Note: 
Computation of total sales, export sales and net profit of unit in SEZ 
Particulars 
Rudra Ltd. (`) 
Unit in DTA (`) 
Unit in SEZ (`) 
Total Sales 
6,00,00,000 
2,00,00,000 
4,00,00,000 
Export Sales 
4,60,00,000 
1,60,00,000 
3,00,00,000 
Net Profit 
80,00,000 
20,00,000 
60,00,000 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
