Embedded finance: A 
strategic outlook 

2  PwC  |  Embedded finance: A strategic outlook
Foreword from PwC 
Innovation has long been a transformative force in the world of FS. From the earliest forms of currency exchanges 
to state-of-the-art complex banking systems, the financial landscape has evolved across the globe to meet the 
changing needs for businesses and consumers. Today, we find ourselves at the precipice of another monumental 
leap forward – the era of EmFi. 
As the world becomes more interconnected, the boundaries between traditional FS and everyday customer 
experiences are beginning to blur. EmFi as a concept seeks to seamlessly integrate financial products and services 
into non-financial offerings, allowing financial transactions and decision making to occur efficiently. EmFi is not a 
new approach in India – for example, banking personnel at large electronics stores help finance the purchase of 
white goods. Furthermore, the current EmFi landscape offers scope for expanding use cases on a larger scale across 
industries. 
The rise of EmFi has been driven by customer demands for convenience, personalisation and accessibility. This 
paradigm shift – fuelled by advancements in FinTech, AI and data analytics – is enabling the growth of a diverse array 
of applications and platforms using embedded financial products – from e-commerce and wealth management to 
ride hailing and healthcare. It is poised to transform the way we manage, move and multiply our money. 
This report highlights some of the key platform models offering EmFi products, outlining their sector-wise use cases. 
It also discusses the impact and benefits of such models on key stakeholders in the EmFi ecosystem. Furthermore, 
the report looks at factors that could influence the EmFi landscape from both the technology and regulatory 
perspectives, providing certain considerations for stakeholders. 
The vision for a responsible financial ecosystem built on the pillars of resilience, inclusivity and sustainability can only 
be realised through global collaboration. As we embark on this journey of embracing EmFi and its transformative 
potential, we will recognise that the opportunities will transcend multiple ecosystems and domestic borders, and 
hence, our solutions must take that into consideration. This collaborative endeavour will shape the future of finance 
and pave the way for a more just, resilient and equitable world for generations to come. 
We would like to extend our gratitude to the NPCI, PCI and FCC for organising the Global FinTech Festival 2023 and 
inviting PwC India to be a knowledge partner. 
Vivek Belgavi 
Partner 
FinTech, Alliances and Ecosystem Leader 
PwC India 
2 PwC | Embedded finance: A strategic outlook 

 
 
 
Executive summary 
EmFi, the seamless integration of FS into the customer journeys of non-financial businesses, has become a 
disruptive force in the financial industry. This report explores the landscape, opportunities, challenges, technology 
and regulatory considerations in this dynamic field. By integrating FS into diverse industries, all stakeholders can tap 
into new customer segments, thus driving customer acquisition, engagement and loyalty. 
However, despite all these advantages, EmFi comes with its share of challenges. The rising importance of security 
and privacy necessitates effective safeguards against data breaches and fraud. Additionally, there could be 
complexities involved in aligning diverse business models and regulatory requirements across industries and 
stakeholder partners. 
Technology development has been crucial to EmFi’s success. Scalable APIs, advanced analytics and AI can be used 
to deliver seamless integration and customised financial solutions, improving customer experiences. 
A robust regulatory environment is necessary to promote the growth of the EmFi sector. Thus, in order to protect 
the consumers, the stakeholders and regulatory bodies could work in a collaborative manner to determine the ideal 
balance between innovation and compliance. 
Below are some key recommendations to further facilitate the growth of EmFi: 
Promote collaboration: Encourage collaborations between FIs and non-FS businesses that can foster innovation 
and resource sharing. 
Prioritise security: Implement ‘security-first’ principles through the establishment of strict security controls and 
compliance protocols to protect private financial information and foster consumer confidence. 
Invest in technology: Allocate resources to develop cutting-edge technologies, such as secure APIs and advanced 
analytics, enabling seamless integration and personalised services. 
Regulatory harmonisation: Encourage cross-industry discussions to standardise regulations, establishing clear 
standards for EmFi without restricting innovation. 
Consumer education: Educate consumers about EmFi’s advantages and risks, thus enabling them to make well-
informed decisions, enhance adoption and help safeguard the brand image of the embedders. 
Embracing EmFis may put companies at the forefront of innovation and revolutionise the FS industry for a future 
that is more inclusive, efficient and customer-focussed. Businesses may succeed in this dynamic environment by 
participating in strategic collaborations, prioritising security, investing in technology and maintaining regulatory 
compliance. 
Embedded finance: A strategic outlook PwC | 3 

4  PwC  |  Embedded finance: A strategic outlook
Glossary 
4 PwC | Embedded finance: A strategic outlook 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Sr. no. 
Abbreviation 
Expanded form 
AA 
Account aggregator 
AI 
Artificial intelligence 
AML 
Anti-money laundering 
API 
Application program interface 
B2B 
Business to business 
B2C 
Business to customer 
BaaS 
Banking as a service 
BNPL 
Buy now pay later 
C2C 
Customer to customer 
CAGR 
Compounded annual growth rate 
CBN 
Central Bank of Nigeria 
CCPA 
California Consumer Privacy Act 
CDR 
Consumer Data Right 
CFPB 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
CMN 
National Monetary Council 
CX 
Customer experience 
DPDPB 
Digital Personal Data Protection Bill 
EmFi 
Embedded finance 
EMI 
Equated monthly instalment 
ESG 
Environmental, social and governance 
FCC 
Fintech Convergence Council 
FI 
Financial institution 
FMCG 
Fast-moving consumer goods 

Sr. no. 
Abbreviation 
Expanded form 
24
FS 
Financial services 
25
G2C 
Government to customer 
26
GDPR 
Global Data Protection Regulations 
27
GFF 
Global FinTech Fest 
28
IRDAI 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India 
29
KYB 
Know your bank 
30
KYC 
Know your customer 
31
MSME 
Micro, small and medium enterprises 
32
NBFC 
Non-banking financial company 
33
NPCI 
National Payment Corporation of India 
34
OCEN 
Open Credit Enablement Network 
35
ONDC 
Open Network for Digital Commerce 
36
P2P 
Peer to peer 
37
PBOC 
People’s Bank of China 
38
PCI 
Payments Council of India 
39
PFRDA 
Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority 
40
PoS 
Point of sale 
41
PSD2 
Payment Services Directive Two 
42
RBI 
Reserve Bank of India 
43
RE 
Regulated entity 
44
SEBI 
Securities and Exchange Board of India 
45
SME 
Small and medium-sized enterprise 
46
UPI 
Unified Payments Interface 
5 PwC | Embedded finance: A strategic outlook 
Embedded finance: A strategic outlook PwC | 5 

6  PwC  |  Embedded finance: A strategic outlook
6 PwC | Embedded finance: A strategic outlook 

Table of contents 
An overview of the global EmFi landscape 
08 
India outlook 
10 
EmFi stakeholders 
16 
Technology considerations and navigating the regulatory landscape 20 
Moving towards a resilient, sustainable and inclusive EmFi ecosystem 23 
7 PwC | Embedded finance: A strategic outlook 
Embedded finance: A strategic outlook PwC | 7 

 
 
 
An overview of the global EmFi landscape 
EmFi, which involves the integration of FS into non-
The benefits derived by EmFi players have driven 
FS providers’ platforms and the customer transaction 
the widespread emergence of use cases and the 
journey, has seen rising adoption in recent years. 
overall growth of the global EmFi market. Estimated 
This has resulted in a marked shift from conventional 
at USD 66.8 billion1 in 2022, the market is projected to 
customer acquisition and distribution by FIs. By 
experience a CAGR of 25.4%2 from 2023 to 2032. The 
incorporating offerings such as payments, lending, 
US leads in EmFi revenues, with USD 26.5 billion3 in 
banking, investment and insurance through APIs, this 
2022, followed by the UK, Germany and Canada. 
innovation has become a significant catalyst for the 
EmFi use cases have predominantly gained traction 
expansion of both the FS industry and non-FS platforms 
in sectors such as consumer platforms, e-tailers, 
or service providers. 
lifestyle products and services – offering seamless 
EmFi presents immense opportunities to enhance 
payments, lending and sachet insurance services 
financial inclusion, user experience and revenue 
at the point of consumption. Emerging use cases 
diversification for both FS manufacturers and non-
are also being witnessed in industries such as food 
FS platforms. FS providers benefit from the reduced 
delivery, travel booking, ride-hailing platforms, supply 
customer acquisition cost when acquiring customers 
chain management, payroll and employee benefits 
through non-FS service provider platforms. On the 
management for offerings such as BNPL, insurance and 
other hand, non-FS providers enjoy enhanced customer 
payment propositions. 
experience and stickiness by delivering customised 
BNPL – a significant trend in EmFi, particularly in 
and composite value propositions to customers at 
e-commerce – enhances transactional ease and 
contextually relevant touchpoints, thereby expanding 
convenience, empowers customers to make higher-
revenue streams. EmFi acts as a medium for end 
ticket purchases, and drives sales for product 
users to access FS in a frictionless manner on a single 
manufacturers. BNPL has potentially contributed to 
platform removing the need to go through multiple 
increased conversion rates on e-commerce platforms 
platforms and service providers. 
by providing seamless credit at point of consumption. 
When integrating FS into a broader customer journey 
As of 2022, the global BNPL market size was estimated 
or workflow, it is pertinent to individualise the offering 
to be USD 4.2 billion,4 and it is expected to grow by a 
in accordance with the context. This means that key 
CAGR of 30.4%5 from 2023 to 2032. PoS lending serves 
factors such as the use case context, value of the 
as an alternative to BNPL, primarily catering to larger-
transaction or even the preferred communication 
ticket purchases like furniture and electronic appliances, 
language of the customer become pertinent while 
and also offers customers the convenience of credit at 
embedding the FS. By tailoring embedded FS to the 
checkout points as well as attractive interest rates such 
relevant context, more seamless and effective integration 
as zero EMI products, as applicable. 
can be achieved. Additionally, providing a seamless 
B2B embedded lending has also seen traction over 
user interface or experience could be advantageous 
in minimising the likelihood of drop-off and ensuring 
customer acceptance. 
1 https://www.bloomberg.com/press-releases/2023-07-03/embedded-finance-market-to-reach-622-9-billion-globally-by-2032-at-25-4-cagr-allied-market-research 
2 https://www.bloomberg.com/press-releases/2023-07-03/embedded-finance-market-to-reach-622-9-billion-globally-by-2032-at-25-4-cagr-allied-market-research 
3 https://www.statista.com/statistics/1388790/embedded-finance-revenue-by-country/#:~:text=It%20was%20estimated%20that%20the,U.S.%20dollars%20
worth%20of%20revenue 
4 https://www.bloomberg.com/press-releases/2023-07-06/e-commerce-buy-now-pay-later-market-to-reach-57-8-billion-globally-by-2032-at-30-4-cagr-allied-market-
research 
5 https://www.bloomberg.com/press-releases/2023-07-06/e-commerce-buy-now-pay-later-market-to-reach-57-8-billion-globally-by-2032-at-30-4-cagr-allied-market-
research 
8 PwC | Embedded finance: A strategic outlook 

9  PwC  |  Embedded finance: A strategic outlook 
-
the last few years as SMEs face challenges in getting access to credit from FIs and banks face challenges in 
underwriting SMEs due to limited credible data. Multiple players in the B2B embedded lending space offer user 
friendly propositions to enhance the experience of the users and fast risk assessment to reduce the disbursement 
time. 
BaaS supports non-banks, challenger and neo-banks in implementing EmFi solutions or capabilities by offering 
white-labelled or co-branded solutions and services through API integration with licenced banking partners. Open 
banking further empowers contextual and bespoke banking services to non-banks by enabling access to customers’ 
financial data held by FIs. 
The potential drivers of global EmFi adoption include demand from consumers for a seamless and superior 
experience while being offered a composite value proposition. Factors such as internet penetration, digital and 
financial literacy, demand from non-FS platforms to provide FS products and services integrated in the customer’s 
transaction journey, increased adoption of open banking frameworks, and the growing digitisation and API usage 
have fuelled the innovation and adoption of EmFi use cases in recent years. 
Embedded finance: A strategic outlook PwC | 9 

 
India outlook 
Over the last decade, India has undergone significant digital transformation owing to the rapid digitisation of FS. This 
acceleration has been enabled through the founding blocks of India Stack including UPI, Aadhaar (biometric-enabled 
identification), e-sign (KYC), account aggregator frameworks (consent-driven data sharing and interoperability), 
ONDC and OCEN. 
These digital public goods and rails have catalysed innovation by private sector players and improved the way in 
which customers interact with their financial service providers – be it banks or other FIs. EmFi is taking this to the 
next level, where customers can access a range of financial products as part of their digital transaction journey, 
with minimal to no interaction with the service providers. Thus, EmFi products have greatly benefited due to the 
proliferation of digital FS and their increased consumption. 
 
  
UPI transaction value 
INR 14.3 trillion 
May 2023 
Number of internet users 
759 million 
Number of smartphone users 
600 million 
Figure 1: Factors driving growth of EmFi in India 
Source: ET BFSI; IAMAI Kantar Report; Mint 
The Indian EmFi ecosystem is expected to grow at a CAGR of 30.4% over the period of 2022–29, thereby increasing 
its revenues generated through EmFi propositions from USD 4.8 billion in 2022 to USD 21.12 billion in 2029.6 
Opportunities 
The most prevalent use cases of EmFi in the FS landscape in India include: 
• 
embedded payments (online payment options at points of consumption) 
• 
embedded insurance (real-time bundling of insurance at points of consumption) 
• 
embedded investments (API-based integrations into investment and/or brokerage platforms) 
• 
embedded cards (cards-as-a-service offering) 
• 
embedded lending (BNPL at points of consumption). 
This section explores some of these opportunities that can be capitalised on by the players. 
6 https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/india-embedded-finance-market-report-2022-market-will-increase-from-4-801-8-million-in-2022-to-reach-21-127-5-
million-by-2029--301603346.html 
10 PwC | Embedded finance: A strategic outlook 

 
Opportunities for EmFi customers 
Opportunities for business growth 
Access to FS: EmFi advances financial inclusion by 
New revenue streams: Businesses can diversify their 
making FS available to underserved groups. EmFi can 
revenue streams by integrating FS. For example, non-FS 
offer access to banking, insurance and investment 
businesses may capitalise on their current infrastructure, 
products and services in India – where a sizeable portion 
data and customer base to offer FS products thereby 
of the population is still unbanked – through pre-existing 
increasing revenue through sourcing and distribution and 
distribution channels including vernacular social media 
also enhancing customer experience and loyalty. 
platforms and e-governance portals. 
Partnerships and collaborations: FinTech start-
Seamless user experience: Integrating FS within 
ups and established FIs can work together to offer 
consumer-facing platforms enhances convenience and 
cutting-edge and customised financial solutions. These 
improves user experience. EmFi enables users to do 
partnerships promote an ecosystem that accelerates 
transactions seamlessly without switching between 
market growth. 
different applications or platforms, increasing adoption 
and engagement. 
Challenges 
While there are multiple opportunities for the ecosystem to drive EmFi propositions and capabilities, there are a few 
challenges that remain to be addressed. PwC has identified the following major challenges to the EmFi ecosystem.8 
Data privacy and security: EmFi, typically, necessitates the exchange and transfer of sensitive financial data among 
multiple stakeholders. Hence, it becomes crucial to safeguard the data being transferred from cybersecurity threats 
and data breaches. In 2023, India has released the DPDPB with the core tenet to harmonise data privacy in the 
country. The bill is a step towards developing comprehensive security measures and data governance practices for 
EmFi ecosystems to remain a trusted medium. 
Consumer protection and trust: With the integration of FS into non-FS customer journeys, consumer trust 
becomes increasingly significant. Therefore, it is crucial to ensure transparency, ethical business practices, and 
efficient customer grievance redressal mechanisms in order to safeguard consumers and maintain trust in EmFi 
offerings. 
Digital divide: Although India has witnessed significant growth in digital adoption, there is still a digital divide, 
particularly in rural areas and among underprivileged communities. Therefore, addressing infrastructure gaps, 
improving digital literacy and increasing internet connectivity to underserved regions are important to ensure 
equitable access to EmFi. 
Competition and market fragmentation: As EmFi gains momentum, competition too shall intensify, saturating 
the market with multiple players offering similar services. Therefore, to ensure sustained success, it will be vital for 
organisations to differentiate offerings and create unique value propositions. 
Regulatory environment: Embedding FS requires businesses to navigate complex regulatory frameworks. 
Furthermore, ensuring compliance with financial regulations and data privacy laws can be challenging for both 
technology companies and traditional FIs. Thus, adherence to regulatory guidelines and a supportive policy 
environment are crucial to foster the growth of EmFi. 
Brand impact: EmFi requires customer-facing entities to be more aware of their offered services and propositions, 
so that there is no mismatch in terms of FS offerings and the brand image of the firm. Mismatches in offerings may 
cause confusion and hamper customer adoption. Therefore, managing customer grievances through established 
redressal mechanisms is important to manage the brand value. 
7 https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/industries/financial-services/publications/managing-embedded-finance-risks.html 
Embedded finance: A strategic outlook PwC | 11 

 
 
Overall, EmFi presents immense opportunities to enhance financial inclusion, user experience and revenue 
diversification in India. However, addressing regulatory complexities, data security and fostering consumer trust are 
crucial for its successful implementation. 
2.1. EmFi business models and archetypes 
The EmFi ecosystem in India encompasses various business models at the intersection of the customers they serve, 
and the FS products or solutions being offered – for example, a B2B EmFi proposition for supply chain finance 
integrated in a logistics or commerce platform for businesses. 
2.1.1. Platform models 
B2B models 
With the integration of EmFi, B2B platforms can offer value-added FS for their business customers. 
Supply chain financing 
Trade finance 
Payment gateway solutions 
B2B platforms can provide 
By integrating with FIs, B2B 
Embedded payment gateways 
embedded lending solutions, 
platforms can streamline trade 
within B2B platforms enable secure 
allowing businesses to access 
finance processes, such as letters of 
and efficient transactions between 
working capital, enable invoice 
credit, and import/export financing. 
businesses, facilitating seamless 
financing, manage cash flow and 
fund transfers and reconciliations, 
improve supplier relationships. 
thus enhancing customer 
experience. 
Embedded insurance solutions 
Integration of sachetised insurance offerings in B2B transaction journeys such as logistics, supply chain and B2B 
e-commerce. Examples of such offerings could be renter’s insurance on commercial property management platforms 
and logistics insurance for cargo protection. 
Case study 
Insurance on SaaS platform 
To enhance the value proposition of their cloud-based SaaS platform, a company that helps small businesses manage 
their inventory and supply chain through features like real-time inventory tracking, automated restocking and supplier 
management, partners with an insurance provider specialising in supply chain risk management and logistics coverage 
to provide insurance coverage integrated directly into the platform’s interface. This allows the small businesses that 
sign up for the platform to choose insurance coverage from a range of options, presented as part of their subscription. 
The data available on the platform is shared through APIs to the provider to aid real-time calculation of insurance 
premiums. 
Examples 
12 PwC | Embedded finance: A strategic outlook 

B2C models 
EmFi enhances B2C platforms by integrating FS in the customer’s journey, creating more value for their customers 
and increasing customer loyalty and retention 
E-commerce financing
Wallet service 
Embedded insurance 
B2C platforms can offer embedded 
Integrating digital wallets 
B2C platforms can offer embedded 
lending options, enabling consumers to 
within B2C platforms allows 
insurance products like purchase 
access installment-based financing or 
users to make seamless 
protection on e-commerce 
credit facilities for purchasing products 
payments, store value and 
platforms, travel insurance on 
Examples
predominantly through BNPL platforms. 
access various FS like fund 
travel aggregator platforms and 
By partnering with merchants and FIs, 
transfers and bill payments. 
subscription-based insurance on 
BNPL platforms integrate financing 
fitness apps. 
options directly at the point of sale, 
simplifying the payment process and 
Investment management 
enhancing affordability for consumers. 
EmFi enables seamless credit evaluations, 
Digital FS aggregator application with EmFi integrations help individuals 
instant loan approvals and flexible 
to track expenses, manage investments and gain insights into their 
repayment options, driving higher 
financial health. This allows for value propositions like automated loose 
conversion rates and boosting sales for 
change savings and investments into liquid funds and gold instruments 
businesses. 
through rule-based rounding up of financial transactions. 
Automobile loans and embedded insurance 
A logistics company based out of India partnered with an embedded insurance platform, a P2P lending player, a credit 
solutions provider and an insurance software firm to provide its driver partners with short-term loans and embedded 
insurance. The company’s platform also enables FIs in the evaluation of loans through the supply of their revenue data. 
C2C models 
Non-FS C2C platforms such as P2P vehicle hiring platforms or P2P commerce platforms can facilitate interactions 
between individual consumers. Embedding financial services within these platforms enhances trust, security and 
financial capabilities. 
P2P lending 
Payments 
Savings and investment platforms 
C2C platforms can integrate 
Embedding mobile payment 
C2C platforms can provide 
lending functionalities, connecting 
solutions within C2C platforms 
embedded savings and investment 
borrowers and lenders directly, with 
enables users to securely transfer 
features. This could include 
Examples
embedded risk assessment and 
funds, split bills and make payments 
offerings like social media platforms 
loan management features. 
to other individuals, promoting P2P 
and online trading communities with 
transactions. 
embedded investment tools to take 
inputs and advices from others on 
the platform. 
Digital wallets 
Digital wallet enable users to store funds, make payments and perform financial transactions with other users across 
multiple C2C platforms by being embedded on each. Users can link their bank accounts or cards to the digital wallets 
for easier access to funds. 
P2P payments for shared expenses 
A P2P expense management platform in India allows its consumers to split expenses with their contacts. This allows 
for multiple users to create expense entries which can be shared either separately or in a group. The app also provides 
embedded payment options through UPI to the users for settling their expenses. 
Embedded finance: A strategic outlook PwC | 13 
Case study 
Case study 

G2C models 
G2C platforms serve as intermediaries between Government entities and citizens, delivering public services and 
benefits. EmFi within G2C platforms enhances efficiency and accessibility. 
Examples
Tax and utility payments 
Financial inclusion initiatives 
By embedding payment gateways, G2C platforms 
G2C platforms such as the National Government Services 
can enable citizens to conveniently pay taxes, utility 
portal and Mudra in India could integrate EmFi services, 
bills and Government fees within the platform, 
providing access to basic banking services, microloans and 
streamlining the overall process. 
sachetised insurance products to the underserved segment. 
Case study 
Income tax filing and payment portal 
The income tax portal of India enables filing of income tax returns. The portal provides detailed information fetched 
through APIs (annual information statement, taxpayer information summary) for customers to file income tax 
seamlessly and comprehensively. The portal also embeds payment options such as UPI, net banking and credit/debit 
cards, for end consumers to settle their overall tax liabilities. 
14 PwC | Embedded finance: A strategic outlook 

E-commerce and
retail
Transportation, 
mobility and
logistics 
Healthcare and 
insurance 
Real estate and 
property 
Education and 
EdTech 
Agriculture and 
rural development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case study: 
Case study: 
Case study: 
Case study: 
Case study: 
Case study: 
E-commerce
Seamless 
Optional add-on 
Integrated 
Personalised 
AgriTech platforms 
platforms enabling
payments and 
travel insurance 
payments and 
education 
offering integrated 
embedded lending
micro-insurance 
offered by Indian 
home loan 
finance solutions 
finance for 
solutions for
integration in ride-
Railways while 
services on real 
by EdTech 
farmers13 
MSMEs8 
hailing apps9 
booking tickets 
estate aggregator 
companies12 
online 10 
platforms11 
A leading agriTech 
One of 
A digital wallet 
A prominent 
start-up in India 
India’s largest 
service by one of 
India’s leading 
A leading real 
EdTech company 
that provides 
e-commerce
the largest ride-
platform for 
estate aggregator 
that allows users 
an end-to-end 
platforms’ B2B
hailing platforms 
securing railway 
platform that allows to search and take 
solution for farmers 
marketplace
in India, expanded 
tickets offers 
users to search 
up online courses 
through a mobile 
partnered with FIs
its services to 
optional add-on 
for properties 
is providing EmFi 
platform designed 
to offer embedded
offer EmFi in their 
insurance to all 
to buy, sell or 
solutions through 
to connect them 
lending solutions
customer journey. 
Indian citizens 
rent, integrated 
partnerships with 
with agri products 
to MSMEs. By
Users can now 
at the time of 
EmFi features 
FIs. It allows users 
and services, is 
analysing MSMEs’
make payments 
purchasing tickets. 
to streamline 
to access student 
offering EmFi. This 
transaction history
for rides, book 
The premium of 
transactions and 
loans, pay course 
will enable farmers 
and sales data, it
cabs and opt for 
the insurance per 
enable FS. Users 
fees and manage 
to access credit 
facilitated instant
ride insurance that 
passenger at the 
can pay rent, book 
educational 
and insurance 
financing options
covers accidents/ 
time of writing this 
home services 
expenses. EmFi 
and purchase 
at the point of
mishaps during 
report stood at INR 
and avail home 
integration is 
agricultural inputs 
consumption. This
the trip. EmFi 
0.35 per passenger loans through 
enabling seamless 
through the 
EmFi solution is
integration is 
and covered 
the platform. 
education finance, 
platform. EmFi 
allowing MSMEs
streamlining the 
hospitalisation, 
EmFi integration 
reducing financial 
integration is 
to access BNPL
payment process, 
disability and 
is simplifying 
barriers and 
simplifying credit 
loans, enabling
eliminating the 
death. EmFi is 
payment 
supporting learning access, reducing 
inventory
need for cash 
enabling a cost-
processes, 
continuity. 
paperwork, 
expansion,
transactions and 
efficient means 
securing 
facilitating timely
improving cash
enhancing user 
of insuring the 
transactions 
procurement and 
flow and driving
convenience. 
underinsured. 
and facilitating 
enhancing farm
business growth.
seamless access 
productivity. 
to home loan 
services. 
Other solutions 
•
BNPL
•
Digital wallets
and payment
gateways
•
Embedded
insurance
•
Inventory and
working capital
financing
•
Fleet
management
financing
•
Freight
factoring
and invoice
financing
•
Integrated
health
insurance
•
EMI for medical
expenses
•
Prescription
financing
•
Home loan
and mortgage
services
•
Rental
insurance
•
Real estate
investment
•
Student loan
and financing
•
Scholarship
and grant
disbursement
•
Course
subscriptions
and micro-
learning
payments
•
Credit and crop
financing
•
Insurance
coverage for
farmers
2.1.2. Sector-wise applications of EmFi 
EmFi is transforming various sectors by integrating FS directly into existing platforms and workflows and providing 
customers a composite value proposition within their journeys and interactions on platforms. The table below 
highlights case studies where EmFi is being implemented across sectors such as e-commerce, mobility and logistics, 
health and insurance, real estate and property, EdTech and agriculture. 
 
 
8    https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/companies/flipkart-wholesale-and-rupifi-partner-to-offer-embedded-bnpl-to-msmes/article37094227.ece 
9 
https://www.olamoney.com/olamoney-hospicash/index.html 
10 https://contents.irctc.co.in/en/InsuranceTermCondition.pdf 
11 https://www.nobroker.in/home-loan?utm_source=google&utm_medium=cpc&utm_campaign=Performance_Max_Internal_HomeLoan&gclid=CjwKCAjwqZSlBhBwEi
wAfoZUIOh0xtD_6oZC1k8Bj12ZxJIO-CBvIbG9z6zpx6wjsmYZRwB-Zp8mFxoCxRUQAvD_BwE
12 https://www.getshopse.com/byjus/ 
13 https://www.corporate.agrostar.in/ 
Embedded finance: A strategic outlook PwC | 15 

EmFi stakeholders 
The key stakeholders in EmFi are the embedders, enablers, providers and consumers. The chart below illustrates the 
relationship between them. 
Figure 2: Relationship between different EmFi stakeholders 
Embedders 
Brands embedding FS in their 
CX acting as user touchpoints 
Customers 
The end users of 
embedded services 
Source: Mitsui 
Enablers 
Tech companies providing 
application to link embedders-
providers for exchange of data 
and services 
(BaaS, credit, money movement, 
data security, compliance, data 
verification, data insights) 
Providers 
Banks and FIs providing the 
financial products/services and 
hold licences for the same 
(BNPL, lending, investing, 
payment, banking, insurance) 
EmFi brings together all stakeholders to create a smooth and interconnected ecosystem where FS can be accessed 
and utilised more conveniently and efficiently within non-financial platforms. This integration enhances the overall 
user experience and expands the reach of FS to a broader customer base. 
Embedders 
Providers 
Embedders are players or platforms that provide non-
Providers are FIs, FinTech firms or other companies that 
FS services and integrate financial products or services 
provide financial products and services like banking, 
from providers (FS manufacturers and licenced entities) 
payments, lending, insurance or investing. The licences 
into their own platform and their customer’s transaction 
and regulatory permission required to provide these 
journeys. These can be e-commerce platforms, mobile 
offerings are typically held by the providers. Providers 
applications, social media networks, platforms for gig 
in the EmFi space make their APIs available to facilitate 
workers or any other firm that wants to offer FS to its 
integration with third-party platforms and applications. 
customers without having to establish themselves as a 
For example, a bank might offer an API that allows a 
full-fledged FI. 
retail app to offer its customers the option to open a 
The APIs from FS providers are integrated by embedders 
savings account directly within the app, or a payment 
to embed financial products and services into their 
service provider might offer an API that enables a ride-
existing customer journey. This makes the overall 
hailing app to process payments seamlessly. 
customer experience more seamless while also offering 
In the context of EmFi, it is also possible for providers 
a composite value proposition. 
to build orchestration platforms and take up the role of 
For example, a retail e-commerce platform can integrate 
the embedder – offering embedded solutions on the 
a BNPL service from a lending provider, allowing 
platform. 
customers to finance their purchases directly through 
the e-commerce platform without leaving the website. 
16 PwC | Embedded finance: A strategic outlook 

 
 
End users 
Figure 3: Illustrative view of communication between each stakeholder in EmFi 
SaaS 
platforms 
E-commerce 
Neobanking 
application 
Banking 
chatbots 
Orchestration 
platforms 
(superapps)  
Embedders 
API layer 
Infrastructure to build products* 
BaaS 
Data connectivity 
Enablers 
Embedded credit cards 
Compliance (KYC, KYB) 
Payments and reconciliation 
Data insight generation 
Data security 
API layer 
Core financial products/services 
Banking 
Payments 
Lending 
Insurance 
Investment 
Providers 
Enablers 
Consumers 
Enablers refer to companies that have the necessary 
Consumers are the end users of the EmFi services. They 
infrastructure and/or build applications which support 
are the customers of the embedders who interact with 
the interaction between embedders and providers. They 
and use the integrated financial products and services 
act as the connecting entity between the two for the 
within the platform or application. EmFi aims to improve 
exchange of data and information. Enablers provide 
convenience, accessibility and user experience for 
the digital architecture for BaaS, embedding credit 
consumers by offering FS directly within the context of 
cards, payments and reconciliation, data security, data 
the services they are already using. 
connectivity, verification, compliance and data insight 
For example, a consumer of a ride-hailing application 
generation. In simple terms, these firms provide APIs to 
might have the option to pay for their service using 
the embedders, so that the companies can extend FS 
various payment methods, access loyalty programmes 
to the customers without having to develop all of them 
or even opt for insurance coverage for their ride – all 
in-house. Therefore, these firms are required to maintain 
within the same app. 
robust security measures and seamless operability. 
In certain cases, it is also possible for providers to 
directly take up the role of enablers. One such example 
could be a bank that offers netbanking APIs to 
embedders. 
Embedded finance: A strategic outlook PwC | 17 

 
3.1. Opportunities for collaboration 
3.2. Benefits for stakeholders 
EmFi offers a plethora of opportunities for collaboration 
between traditional FIs and non-FS businesses, which 
opens up routes to provide immense value to all 
stakeholders involved. Partnering with non-FS business 
offers FIs potential access to new customer segments, 
which can lead to increased customer acquisitions 
and improved engagements. Similarly, non-financial 
businesses can enjoy the benefits of enhanced customer 
loyalty, new revenue streams and offer their customers 
improved experiences. 
Businesses can benefit from other businesses by sharing 
skills and expertise through the formation of strategic 
partnerships and alliances. This can help in creating 
an ecosystem that adds value for all stakeholders and 
fosters innovation, driving customer-focused solutions 
which propel the industry forward. Collaborations 
in the EmFi space could prove to be essential in 
determining the direction of the FS industry as customer 
expectations evolve. 
According to the 2016 PwC Global FinTech Survey, 42% 
of banks engaged in partnerships with FinTechs.14 This 
figure has more than doubled as of 2023, where over 
90% of FS firms are bullish on improving their revenues 
through partnerships with FinTechs.15 According to a 
global business perspectives survey on EmFi, of the 
1,000 leaders at non-financial companies around the 
world, a majority of the participants (70%) that have 
already implemented EmFi solutions mentioned that 
they leveraged partnerships for obtaining and licencing 
products as part of their EmFi approach.16 Additionally, 
businesses may have multiple incentives to opt for these 
alliances and collaborations, including the value that 
incumbent FIs bring to the table in terms of managing 
money movement, which is subject to complexity and 
regulations. 
Typically, enablers simplify the process of incorporating 
FS into non-FS value propositions. They manage the 
challenges associated with establishing a partnership 
with the providers and developing APIs, which enable 
embedders to swiftly integrate FS products and services 
into their existing customer journeys within mere weeks 
or months. This significantly reduces the time taken 
to build such capabilities from scratch. Therefore, 
partnerships between ecosystem players have become 
the go-to mode for offering EmFi offerings, owing to their 
inherent advantages for stakeholders. 
3.2.1. Stickiness (embedders) 
Integrating FS and non-FS helps embedders improve 
user experience by providing personalised, contextual 
and targeted recommendations on products and 
services. A prolonged positive customer experience 
through frictionless digital journeys leads to increased 
trust in the embedded platforms. This increases user 
lock-in on the platform, and hence translates to a higher 
share of loyal customers. 
3.2.2. Improved data analytics for better 
consumer insights (providers) 
EmFi provides opportunities for FS players to access 
customer transactional data and identify consumption 
behaviours which can be used to design personalised 
FS products and optimise existing customer journeys 
on the embedder platform – for example, using data 
from e-commerce platforms to offer tailored BNPL 
offers, targeted rewards, personalised credit limits, and 
integrated savings and investment options. The bi-
directional ecosystem integration helps FS players to 
capitalise on this opportunity by implementing targeted 
analytics strategies to personalise and contextualise 
their product offerings. 
3.2.3. Expansion of revenue streams 
EmFi can provide several avenues for revenue to their 
stakeholders involved in the ecosystem. Some of the 
key revenue streams for the stakeholders are discussed 
below. 
Providers 
Transaction fee: Each financial transaction made 
through a provider’s API may be charged a transaction 
fee. For example, any payment processed through the 
embedder’s platform can be subject to a small fee, paid 
to the payment service provider. 
Interest/fee on loans and credit: Providers can 
earn interest and fees on the loans extended to the 
embedder’s customers for the lending and credit 
services offered to them. 
14 https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/financial-services/fintech/assets/fin-tech-banking-2016.pdf 
15 https://www.innreg.com/blog/bank-fintech-partnerships-examples-and-evolution 
16 https://assets.ctfassets.net/ss5kfr270og3/3aWnLyVDCcwuNOdIDs1aOC/baec2f07bd09549f40eb7858a710e50c/Embedded-Finance-FINAL.pdf 
18 PwC | Embedded finance: A strategic outlook 

 
Enablers 
Licencing fee: By providing access to FS APIs to the 
embedders, enablers can generate revenue. This can 
either be charged as a one-time setup fee or in the form 
of ongoing licencing fees. 
Revenue sharing: In certain instances, enablers and 
embedders may agree on revenue-sharing agreements, 
so the enabler receives a portion of the generated 
revenues from the FS offerings on the platform. 
Embedders 
Commission/referral fee: Embedders can earn 
referral fee or commissions from the providers for every 
customer they refer who utilises the FS offered by the 
embedder’s platform. For example, an e-commerce 
platform might receive a commission for each user who 
uses the site to apply for a credit card or loan. 
Premium services and upgrades: Customers of the 
embedders’ platform can be offered premium FS or 
value-added features for a fee. 
Data monetisation: Embedders can analyse user data 
and offer insights to providers or other businesses for a 
fee. These insights can be valuable in improving financial 
products and services. 
It’s important to note that the revenue streams are 
dependent on the nature of FS offered, the region, and 
the agreements between the parties involved. New 
revenue modes and opportunities may begin to emerge 
for the different stakeholders, as EmFi continues to grow 
and evolve. 
3.2.4. Frictionless and personalised experiences 
to consumers 
In order to help customers choose the best product 
or service at the point of contextual relevancy, 
embedded FS may offer them frictionless, hyper-
personalised experiences in the form of tailored nudges 
and recommendations during their exploration and 
purchase journeys. One example of this could be a 
personal finance management application that partners 
with various FIs to offer a wide range of banking and 
FS, which are personalised in nature. This could be 
done by analysing the customer transaction data from 
partner platforms to identify spending behaviour and 
offer propositions like real-time savings suggestions, 
automated smart investments through partners – 
including loose change investment options through 
rule-based rounding up of transactions and micro loan 
offerings through partner FIs that can use the existing 
customer data for underwriting. 
Embedded finance: A strategic outlook PwC | 19 

 
4.1. Technology point of view – integrating 
FS into non-FS customer journeys 
The growth of embedded FS opens up new possibilities 
alongside a set of considerations and challenges. 
According to 33% of FS CEOs surveyed as part of 26th 
Annual Global CEO Survey: India perspective in 2023, 
one of the top risks anticipated over the next five years 
is cyber risks.17 This concern is particularly relevant for 
EmFi as the integration of FS into non-FS platforms 
and applications introduces new avenues for cyber 
threats and vulnerabilities. There are several technology 
considerations when implementing EmFi solutions. 
Some of the key considerations are discussed below: 
API integration: API integration allows for multiple 
systems to securely communicate and share data in real 
time, which is essential to offer seamless information 
exchange between FS providers and non-FS players. 
This enables functionalities like payments, lending and 
savings, which is a core tenet of EmFi offerings.  
Security and compliance: Security is paramount when 
handling sensitive financial data of consumers. To 
protect customer data, robust security measures such 
as encryption, two-factor authentication and regular 
security audits could be implemented. Compliance with 
pertinent financial regulations such as KYC and AML 
requirements is also crucial. 
Technology considerations and navigating 
the regulatory landscape 
Scalability: EmFi solutions may experience rapid 
growth, and the underlying technology should be 
scalable to handle increasing user demand and 
transaction volumes. Technologies that follow cloud 
native architecture and microservices architecture with 
support for a hybrid cloud implementation can support 
scalability effectively. 
Omnichannel experience: Providing a consistent 
and user-friendly experience across various customer-
facing channels, such as mobile apps, website, social 
medial channels and in-person interactions, is essential 
for EmFi. Technologies and analytics approaches that 
enable the consumer to access FS services seamlessly 
and frictionlessly through each of these channels are 
important. 
Risk management: To identify and reduce risk of 
fraud, EmFi platforms require robust risk management 
systems. To analyse user behaviour and transaction 
patterns for early fraud detection, machine learning 
algorithms can be deployed. 
Real-time data and analytics: EmFi platforms with 
capabilities such as real-time data processing and 
advanced data analytics would be required to provide 
contextually relevant and personalised FS offerings and 
insights to customers. Access to real-time financial data 
enables dynamic decision making and improves user 
engagement. 
Customer support: In the FS domain, customer 
trust and reliable support is essential. The overall 
CX in EmFi can be elevated considerably through 
the implementation of reliable customer support 
mechanisms (e.g. vernacular chatbots) to address 
queries, complaints and grievances promptly. 
Overall, technology considerations for EmFi revolve 
around scalability, providing an omni-channel 
experience, customer support and improving data 
processing capabilities. Companies could look into 
these considerations to build successful EmFi offerings 
and bridge the customer trust gap. 
17 https://www.pwc.in/publications/ceo-survey/ceo-survey-2023.html 
20 PwC | Embedded finance: A strategic outlook 

4.2. Regulatory considerations for EmFi in the current FS landscape 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Summary of EmFi regulatory practices across multiple geographies 
Brazil 
United 
States of 
America 
In May 2020, the central bank and the 
CMN issued Joint Resolution No.1, 
which has set out an implementation 
plan for open banking systems. 
• 
In China, private companies strongly 
emphasise data protection. 
• 
In 2020, PBOC published a financial 
industry standard of APIs (security 
level). 
China 
• 
The EU is among the more mature regions when it 
comes to EmFi regulations. 
• 
The rejig of PSD2 specifies that FinTech integration 
providers would be required to obtain specific licences 
and approvals to provide their services. 
• 
This coupled with the safeguards placed through the 
GDPR, AML directive and implementation of KYC 
frameworks has made customer data protection more 
robust. 
Regulations 
• 
Federal bodies monitor FinTech activity, but regulations differ 
across states. 
• 
The CFPB published regulations to protect EmFi consumers. 
• 
The CCPA, dated 1 July 2023, provides consumers with more 
control over their data 
Nigeria 
The CBN unveiled operational guidelines for open 
banking in the country in February 2019, followed 
by a regulatory framework aligned with these 
guidelines in 2021. 
across 
regions 
EU 
Australia 
India 
In 2020, Australia launched the CDR and has 
expressed interest in the adoption of open 
banking. 
• 
In 2020, the RBI issued guidelines for ‘loans 
sourced by banks and NBFCs over digital 
lending platforms’ that ensure that the 
responsibility of adhering to fair practises 
falls on lenders while lending through digital 
platforms. 
• 
In 2023, the DPDPB was passed in India, providing guidelines 
for processing digital personal data in India, elucidating the 
obligation of the data fiduciaries and the rights to individuals. 
• 
However, there are no separate legislatures in place for the 
FinTech or EmFi space. 
The growth and evolution of EmFi in recent years has made it pertinent to have certain regulatory considerations 
to ensure the protection of consumer data, financial stability and provide a level playing field for all stakeholder 
concerned. Regulators face unique challenges with the growth of innovations in the EmFi space. From India’s 
standpoint, it is reassuring that the RBI, in its Payments Vision 2025 document18 has affirmed exploring guidelines 
on payments involving BNPL services. Keeping the above in mind, here are some key regulatory considerations for 
EmFi: 
AA access: In the Indian context, only REs from four financial sector regulators (RBI, SEBI, IRDAI, PFRDA) are 
allowed to access data from the AA network. This data is leveraged largely to make credit easily and formally 
accessible to the customers. Since EmFi players – such as e-commerce entities, who are focused on providing 
customer-first services – have a large market to cater to, these customers’ need for credit products, access to the 
data from the AA network (with strict customer consent) may prove to be a welcome step in ensuring: 
• 
better analysis of a customer’s credit history (with access to consented customer data) before tailored EmFi 
products are offered to them 
• 
smooth and increased disbursal of credit to end customers 
• 
seamless customer journey. 
Regulators across the globe could also consider providing such data access through centralised databases to EmFi 
players, offering credit-like products. 
18 https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PublicationReport/Pdfs/PAYMENTSVISION2025844D11300C884DC4ACB8E56B7348F4D4.PDF 
Embedded finance: A strategic outlook PwC | 21 

Data protection and privacy: As EmFi requisites exchange of sensitive financial data between multiple stakeholders, 
stringent privacy and data protection regulations are necessary. The DPDPB in India provides data owners with the 
following rights/data principles: 
• 
Right to provide and withdraw consent on data usage 
• 
Right to access information about personal data 
• 
Right to correction of personal data 
• 
Right to erasure 
• 
Right of grievance addressal 
Thus, regulators worldwide could impose similar measures to protect customer data, prevent data breaches and 
ensure that customer provides their consent for sharing financial information. 
Fraud and security: To prevent fraud, money laundering and cyberattacks in EmFi, regulators may consider 
establishing relevant measures. One such consideration could be implementing real-time monitoring and reporting 
mechanisms that can help in identifying and preventing illegal activities. 
Risk management: Lack of proper risk-management capabilities may result in compromised consumer trust, 
inoperable products, data leaks and breaches, and fraudulent activities. With increasing number of non-FS players 
entering the FS space through EmFi, regulators may consider creating frameworks to evaluate unique risks 
associated with EmFi and manage those risks accordingly. 
Fair competition and access to market: In the EmFi market, regulators could ensure fair competition and prevent 
anti-competitive practices. This includes considering open access to APIs and fostering an environment where all 
participants have an equitable chance of success under relevant regulatory oversight. 
Interoperability and standards: It is crucial to consider establishing interoperability and common regulatory 
standards across multiple industries to enable seamless integration of FS into existing non-FS customer journeys. 
To ensure a smooth and secure CX, regulators can play a role in fostering partnerships and establishing sector-wide 
standards. 
Cross-border regulations: EmFi can go beyond international boundaries, making cross-border regulatory 
collaboration and cooperation essential. The DPDPB allows for cross-border transfer of data if the geography to 
which the data is being transferred is unrestricted by the Government of India. To manage international transactions 
and data flows, regulators can work together across jurisdictions and harmonise regulatory frameworks to reduce 
overlap and promote innovation. 
Consumer education and grievance redressal: With the advent of technology-backed FS products, consumer 
protection has remained a primary goal of the regulators across geographies. To this end, in addition to considering 
collaboration with industry participants to educate consumers about EmFi offerings (including its benefits, risks 
and rights), regulators must ensure that EmFi players establish robust customer grievance redressal mechanisms in 
place. Consumers who are well informed are better able to make wise financial decisions to protect themselves from 
potential fraud. Parallelly, since EmFi involves multiple stakeholders coming together to provide multiple services 
under one umbrella, a robust grievance redressal framework can help customers have a clear understanding of the 
escalation matrix in case of any issues during the course of a transaction. 
Innovation and sandboxes: Regulators can consider creating sandboxes to promote innovations in EmFi. These 
regulated environments enable start-ups and FinTech companies to evaluate novel ideas and products in a 
constrained setting while receiving regulatory oversight and assistance. 
The integration of FS in non-FS customer journeys and transactions has enormous potential, but also necessitates 
robust oversight from regulatory entities. To strike the right balance between inculcating innovation, ensuring 
customer protection, and preserving the stability and integrity of the financial system, an adaptive, forward-thinking 
approach to regulating EmFi is required. 
22 PwC | Embedded finance: A strategic outlook 

Moving towards a resilient, sustainable 
and inclusive EmFi ecosystem 
Embedded payments, embedded cards and embedded lending have demonstrated a diverse range of use cases 
across multiple industries, consumers and platforms. However, there exist unexplored opportunities in embedded 
insurance and embedded WealthTech. Projections suggest that embedded insurance could potentially constitute 
16% of global insurance distribution in terms of gross written premiums by 2032.19 Similarly, embedded wealth 
solutions are estimated to generate USD 100 billion in revenue in the form of fees globally.20 
Figure 5: EmFi opportunities across sectors by the end of 2030 
EmFi opportunities by 2030 (in USD billion) 
3,500 
1,500 
1,200 
500 
400 
Retail and e-commerce 
Others 
Healthcare 
Education 
Telecom 
Source: Fintech News Switzerland 
 
By 2030, retail and e-commerce are predicted to dominate 49%21 of the EmFi market, followed by sectors like 
healthcare, education, telecom, real estate, hospitality, travel, media and entertainment, energy, and pharmaceuticals. 
Within retail and e-commerce, the key opportunities lie in providing embedded product insurance, consumer 
financing at the point of sale, working capital solutions and supply chain financing.22 
Case in point: A Bengaluru-based FinTech offers lending-as-a-service offerings for SMEs. The platform works with 
B2B marketplaces to help merchant partners with embedded working capital solutions. It has empowered over 
50,000 retailers and SMEs across FMCG, electronics and general merchandise. 
19 https://static1.squarespace.com/static/610ab08e1f9a3b01a739c67b/t/63775c9a1ad4e54f7c78f66e/1668766881783/
Embedded+Insurance+2.0+-+Incumbent+Strategy+-+International+Peer+Group+Report+-+June+2022.pdf 
20 https://www.additiv.com/insights/embedded-wealth-download/ 
21 https://fintechnews.ch/fintech/embedded-finance-total-market-value-could-reach-us7-2t-by-2030/52074/ 
22 https://www.rupifi.com/ 
Embedded finance: A strategic outlook PwC | 23 

 
24  PwC  |  Embedded finance: A strategic outlook
EmFi can bridge the gap for underserved populations, benefiting SMEs, migrants, farmers and gig workers. 
Microfinance institutions can extend lending and banking services to rural communities and low-income households 
through EmFi. These microfinance institutions can partner with multiple players like agri supply chain platforms 
(to provide loans for input purchases, crop insurance and fair pricing mechanisms), telecom and mobile money 
operators (to offer mobile-based FS to individuals in remote areas), and energy and utilities platforms (to offer 
financing solutions for clean energy products like solar home systems) significantly enhancing financial inclusion and 
access for underserved populations. EmFi can help in reducing the credit gap of SMEs in India which is estimated to 
be around USD 53023 billion as of 2023. 
To tap into EmFi’s potential, technical and operational capabilities, standardisation of APIs for open banking and 
BaaS, effective partnerships among ecosystem players, defining composite value propositions and being compliant 
with regulations are crucial. 
EmFi has begun to transform the FS landscape by seamlessly integrating financial offerings into non-FS platforms 
and has the potential to transform multitudes of industries. Additionally, further enablement through investment in 
robust technological infrastructure, collaboration among ecosystem players and standardised regulatory frameworks 
can catalyse the growth of EmFi propositions. As the FS market continues to evolve, businesses that embrace EmFi 
are poised to thrive in the digital economy, delivering greater value to customers and staying at the forefront of 
financial innovation. 
23 https://www.financialexpress.com/industry/sme/msme-fin-530-billion-massive-credit-gap-in-indias-msme-sector-out-of-819-billion-addressable-demand-
report/3031372/ 
24 PwC | Embedded finance: A strategic outlook 

25  PwC  |  Embedded finance: A strategic outlook 
Embedded finance: A strategic outlook PwC | 25 

26  PwC  |  Embedded finance: A strategic outlook
26 PwC | Embedded finance: A strategic outlook 

27  PwC  |  Embedded finance: A strategic outlook 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
About PwC 
At PwC, our purpose is to build trust in society and solve important problems. We’re a network of firms in 152 
countries with over 328,000 people who are committed to delivering quality in assurance, advisory and tax services. 
Find out more and tell us what matters to you by visiting us at www.pwc.com. 
PwC refers to the PwC network and/or one or more of its member firms, each of which is a separate legal entity. 
Please see www.pwc.com/structure for further details. 
© 2023 PwC. All rights reserved. 
Contact us 
Vivek Belgavi 
Vivek Patil 
Partner, FinTech, and Alliances and 
Partner, Financial Services 
Ecosystems Leader 
Advisory 
vivek.belgavi@pwc.com 
vivek.v.patil@pwc.com 
Avneesh Singh Narang 
Raghav Aggarwal 
Director, FinTech and Alliances and 
Associate Director, FinTech and 
Ecosystems 
Innovation Strategy 
avneesh.narang@pwc.com 
raghav.aggarwal@pwc.com 
Authors 
Editorial support 
Avneesh Narang 
Shirin Patil 
Rashi Gupta 
Dion D’Souza 
Raghav Aggarwal 
Rudra Pratap Tomar 
Vignesh Venkataraman 
Arham Jain 
Design 
Shipra Gupta 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pwc.in 
Data Classification: DC0 (Public) 
In this document, PwC refers to PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited (a limited liability company in India having Corporate Identity Number or 
CIN : U74140WB1983PTC036093), which is a member firm of PricewaterhouseCoopers International Limited (PwCIL), each member firm of which 
is a separate legal entity. 
This document does not constitute professional advice. The information in this document has been obtained or derived from sources believed 
by PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited (PwCPL) to be reliable but PwCPL does not represent that this information is accurate or complete. 
Any opinions or estimates contained in this document represent the judgment of PwCPL at this time and are subject to change without notice. 
Readers of this publication are advised to seek their own professional advice before taking any course of action or decision, for which they are 
entirely responsible, based on the contents of this publication. PwCPL neither accepts or assumes any responsibility or liability to any reader of this 
publication in respect of the information contained within it or for any decisions readers may take or decide not to or fail to take. 
© 2023 PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited. All rights reserved. 
SG/August 2023-M&C 31126 
