Fintech in India

This report is created and published by: 
swissnex India l Consulate General of Switzerland
#26 Rest House Crescent Road, Bangalore, India 560001
Tel.: +91 80 4941 2000
 
To download this report, visit: www.swissnexindia.org.
To order copies of this report, send an email to: innovation@swissnexindia.org 
 
Month of publishing: October 2016
Designed and printed in India
 
swissnex India connects Switzerland and India in the ﬁ elds of science, education, art and 
innovation. An initiative of the Swiss State Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation 
(SERI) in association with the Swiss Federal Department of Foreign Aﬀ airs, swissnex India is 
part of the Consulate General of Switzerland in Bangalore (www.swissnexindia.org). 
in association with 
MEDICIPRIM FINTECH PRIVATE LIMITED which is world’s leading comprehensive online 
platform, dedicated to Fintech.
The information and analyses contained in this document have been prepared by swissnex 
India in association with MEDICIPRIM FINTECH PRIVATE LIMITED. swissnex India and its 
partners assume no responsibility for errors and omissions related to the data, calculations or 
analysis contained herein and in no event will swissnex India or its partners be liable for direct, 
special, incidental or consequential damages (including, but not limited to, damages for loss 
of business profi ts, business interruption and loss of business information) arising directly or 
indirectly from the use of (or failure to use) this report. 
in association with

Table of Contents 
	
LIST OF ACRONYMS
1	
INTRODUCTION
2	
AN OVERVIEW OF FINTECH IN INDIA
2.1	
The Evolution of Fintech in India
2.2	
The Indian Fintech Ecosystem
2.3	
Government, Regulatory Bodies and Financial Infrastructure
2.4	
Accelerators and Incubators
2.5	
Human Resources
3	
WHAT MAKES FINTECH IN INDIA UNIQUE?
3.1	
Comparing India versus other Fintech hubs globally
3.2	
Payments
3.3	
Alternative Lending
3.4	
Innovation in the Indian Fintech market
3.5	
Challenges facing Indian Fintech industry
4	
CASE STUDIES
4.1	
Insurtech – the new kid on the block
4.2	
PayTM – from Fintech startup to India’s largest payment company
4.3	
Zerodha – India’s discount brokerage platform for the 21st century
5	
OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
6	
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
7	
SOURCES
	
3
4
5
5
7
9
11
12
14
14
16
18
20
22
23
23
24
26
27
30
31


3
List of 
Acronyms
APAC: Asia-Pacific Region
MICR: Magnetic Ink Character Recognition
BC: Banking Correspondent
UPI: Universal Payment Interface
NPCI: National Payments Council of India
KYC: Know your customer
BBPS: Bharat Bill Payment System
BBPCU: Bharat Bill Payment Central Unit
RBI: Reserve Bank of India
IIT: Indian Institute of Technology
IIM: Indian Institute of Management
PPI: Prepaid Payment Instrument
NRI: Non-Resident Indian
NSDL: National Securities Depository Limited
eKYC: electronic Know your customer
SEBI: Securities and Exchange Board of India
IRDA: Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
TRAI: Telecom Regulatory Authority of India
LIC: Life Insurance of India
O2O: Online to Offline and Commerce

4
With a population of around 1.3 billion, India is a growing market for Fintech. A large percent-
age of unbanked or underbanked population and the fact that it is a young nation witnessing 
high growth in digital penetration, makes India an exciting global space for Fintech.
With over half a billion dollars flowing into startups, Fintech in India has grown rapidly in the 
last three years and the segment is expected to grow further. Banks and financial institutions 
have taken note of this and are actively participating in the ecosystem. The government and 
regulators have also taken several initiatives to boost the Fintech ecosystem and provide 
startups with new opportunities to launch competitive products.
The aim of this report on Fintech in India is to provide a comprehensive overview of the 
Indian Fintech ecosystem. The first section of the report summarizes the Fintech ecosystem 
in India including the investors, startups, accelerators and incubators, human capital, and 
initiatives taken by banks and the government.
The second segment discusses the uniqueness of the Indian Fintech ecosystem, compared 
to other global Fintech hubs. It also provides a brief analysis of innovation, trends and key 
growth drivers for payments and lending segments, which have seen rapid growth in India in 
the last couple of years.
In the next segment, the report provides details of two key Fintech companies – Paytm and 
Zerodha – which have disrupted the traditional means of doing business and have been 
prominent in their segments. It is followed by an analysis of an upcoming Fintech segment in 
India: InsurTech.
The report concludes with an overview of how Swiss entrepreneurs could benefit from the 
Indian growth story, and major areas of making an impact. It also provides insights into 
some of the major challenges Swiss Fintech startups could face when they enter the Indian 
market.
1. 
Introduction

5
In line with the rest of the world, Fintech is a young industry in India. This section starts off 
with explaining where Fintech came from and how far it has come. It further outlines the 
ecosystem such as investors, startups and government agencies active in the Indian Fintech 
space.
2.1 The Evolution of Fintech in India
The Indian government began liberalizing its banking industry post-1990 with the 
introduction of technology-savvy banks. The government also took legislative action to 
boost the banking system and pushed new technology such as MICR, electronic funds 
transfer and other electronic payments that revolutionized the banking system and in turn 
boosted the Indian economy. However, for two decades from 1991, the technological 
innovation in financial services and banking were government-driven and witnessed slow 
growth.
Mimicking the global trend, the Indian banking and financial industry has witnessed the 
penetration of startups or Fintech in the consumer-facing offerings from the mid-2000s. One 
of the initial offerings, which came up at around 2005, was the banking correspondent (BC) 
model, which was used to increase penetration of financial services to the rural household. 
With agents having basic technology to perform financial transactions BCs offered a low-
cost alternative to setting up branches for FIs to serve the rural population. FinoPayTech 
and Eko India were the major startups that took advantage of this opportunity and built 
their services around the BC model. 2010 saw an emergence of payment startups in mobile 
wallets; e-bill payment and mobile recharge services. Major Fintech startups such as Oxigen, 
MobiKwik, Paytm and Freecharge originated between 2005–10. From 2010, there have been 
multiple Fintech startups that have mushroomed in different segments such as lending (100+ 
startups), personal finance management (40+ startups) and investment management (90+ 
startups). Fintech has gained even more prominence with VC firms displaying keen interest 
with a 40% growth in investments or funding activity between 2014 and 2016. Banking 
technology startups offering solutions that help banks to digitally and cost-effectively serve 
their customers are still in a nascent stage and are expected to take off as the digital and 
smart city initiatives of the Indian government are aimed at providing the physical and digital 
infrastructure for the last-mile digital connectivity.
““As we go from data-poor to data-rich, we are just getting 
started in Fintech.”
Mr. Nandan Nilekani, Former Chairman - Unique 
Identification Authority of India
2. 
An Overview of 
Fintech in India
Source: LTP

6
The last three years (2014–16) have witnessed various developments in the Fintech segment 
in India where apart from startups and investments, the established corporate sector 
including banks, financial institutions and others as well as the government and regulatory 
bodies have taken steps to develop, implement and propel innovative solutions.
The regulatory bodies and banks have brought new solutions that will create interesting 
opportunities for Fintech and the financial services sector as a whole. The most prominent 
of these is the launch of UPI – Universal Payment Interface. To leverage the increasing usage 
of smartphones and mobile apps, NPCI (National Payments Council of India, the umbrella 
organization that sets the payment rails in India) launched UPI, a set of standard APIs with 
an open architecture provided to the banks in order to facilitate account-to-account transfers 
by customers by entering just one virtual ID (like name@bankname.com or mobilenumber@
bankname.com). Leading startups like India’s largest marketplace e-commerce players 
Flipkart and Snapdeal have partnered with Yes Bank and Axis Bank respectively to 
incorporate UPI in their mobile payment offerings. Yes Bank has also partnered with 50 
merchants in various segments such as lending, e-commerce, and mobile payments to 
provide full usage of UPI via their Yes Pay Wallet. This enables business for efficient P2P 
transactions, and also eliminates the waiting time or failed transactions associated with 
online payment and gateways. 
Another visible trend in Fintech ecosystem is the growing number of partnerships between 
banks and Fintech startups. For instance, HDFC Bank and the Fintech startup ‘Tone Tag’ 
have partnered to provide phone-based proximity services and Yes Bank partnered with 
Ultracash Technologies to enable sound-based proximity payments. 
Banks have also launched solutions with the help of their in-house teams aimed at improving 
the digital financial infrastructure. Some of the initiatives include:
•	
ICICI bank launched a contactless mobile payment system which could enhance NFC 
payments in India
•	
Axis Bank presented the ‘Invoice to Payment’ feature that provide end-to-end digital 
invoicing and payment solutions
•	
DBS introduced the first mobile bank that allows customers to open accounts digitally 
with their PAN card and Aadhaar card
•	
Union Bank launched the *99# mobile application in partnership with NPCI that allows 
basic services like balance inquiry, fund transfers and mini statements to its customers 
even when there is no internet
These new solutions will enable Fintech startups to leverage the infrastructure created 
by banks to enable their solutions or enhance existing offerings with superior product 
experience.

7
2.2 The Indian Fintech Ecosystem
A major role in kick-starting the evolution of Fintech in India was played by startups 
offering digital mobile recharges. For a very long time, Indian consumers used coupons 
purchased from retail outlets, largely by cash for prepaid mobile phone recharges. This 
evolved to digital recharges, which in turn evolved into digital wallets and usage of wallets 
for various other commerce activities. The fact that these new offerings have strongly 
impacted consumer behaviour has not only attracted attention from more technology savvy 
individuals, but also a lot of investments. An analysis of Indian Fintech startups that have 
been founded post-2007 shows that investments in these firms has grown from USD 25 
million in 2013 to USD 109.1 million in 2014 and reached USD 364.6 million in 2015. 
Interestingly, the investment in Fintech startups is not limited to mobile wallets. India 
currently has over 600 Fintech startups in the space of lending, payments, InsurTech, 
blockchain and RegTech. This number is expected to grow further with initiatives such as 
focused accelerator programs by local and regional governments and banks, and funding 
support by leading corporates and VCs.
Segment-focused VC firms or segment-focused arms of VC firms have only just begun 
skimming the Fintech potential in India. This is in contrast to developed markets like USA 
where one can find Fintech-focused VC firms like Ribbit Capital, QED Investors, Nyca 
Partners and more. However, not having segment-focused VC firms does not imply a 
shortfall in investment for Indian Fintech startups – VC firms in India have invested across 
segments including Fintech. For example, Sequoia Capital and Matrix Partners have 
invested in cab aggregators, Fintech startups and e-commerce. Both these investors expect 
higher returns with the huge cross-industry growth potential. The rise of cab aggregator 
services has resulted in the growth of the number of cabs in India, which has led to an 
increased demand for auto financing options in lending. The growing digital penetration is 
driving e-commerce, and the usage of wallets for enabling commerce transactions has led 
to an increased demand for payment offerings. This kind of cross-industry growth has been 
driving VC firms to invest across segments.
In early 2016, Goldman Sachs announced early-stage conversations with Indian Fintech 
startups to potentially invest up to USD 10 million. Apart from international financial 
institutions such as Goldman Sachs, Barclays and Citi, other banks such as Indian’s largest 
national bank State Bank of India have set up innovation hubs or accelerator programs 
to attract startups. Well-known global investors like Sequoia, SAIF, Matrix Partners, IDG 
Ventures and others have made few big bets in the Fintech space such as MobiKwik, Citrus 
Payments and Bankbazaar.com.

8
Among the various other interesting Fintech startups that have procured funding, one 
such startup, Capital Float, provides loans to SMEs by assessing their history through 
partnerships with e-commerce players. Capital Float has raised three rounds of financing 
on consecutive years between 2014 and 2016. The major driver for its growth has been 
mutual growth between e-commerce and lending requirement for SMEs. The company has 
enabled merchants on e-commerce platforms to finance their growth that in turn benefits the 
e-commerce players, that would eventually build stronger partnerships with Capital Float. 
Another company, which has been getting traction from investors, is Bankbazaar.com, an 
application-based end-to-end financial service provider. The company aggregates financial 
products from banks and compares them to suit the needs of the customer. The company 
also helps in collecting the documents required for KYC and submits it to banks, which 
Source: LTP

9
makes the application process easier for the customers and banks. They generate revenues 
by earning a commission on applications for banking products.
Additionally noticeable is the Fintech startup Citrus Pay, which has launched ‘Sellfie’ which 
enables individuals and small businesses to promote, sell and collect payments on social 
networks and instant messengers, propelling social commerce. Finally, to cater to the large 
number of customers without a credit card – only 10 million people in India have a credit 
card – ZestMoney has launched an on-demand instant credit service. This boosts the buying 
capability of the young population, which has no access to credit cards.
Hence, both investors and startups in India have been actively involved in the emergence 
of a vibrant Indian Fintech ecosystem. They have, however, moved into a space that has 
traditionally been heavily influenced by the Indian Government and Regulatory Bodies as 
well as the Financial Infrastructure. The impact of these regulatory frameworks is outlined in 
the next section. 
2.3 Government, Regulatory Bodies and 
Financial Infrastructure
The government and the regulatory bodies have recognized the changes that are taking 
place in the Indian Fintech space and have constantly kept pace with the rapidly changing 
environment in terms of technology and customer expectation.
The Indian government has launched a funding support initiative called ‘Startup in India’ 
which has a dedicated fund of USD 1.5 billion to support Indian startups. Similar to VC 
funding, this fund is expected to be disbursed across various segments, not limited to 
but including Fintech. Furthermore, the Indian government has launched various tax and 
surcharge reliefs such as income tax exemption for startups for the first three years, setting 
up National Credit Guarantee Trust Company to provide credit guarantee mechanisms 
via debt funding for startups, and exempting capital gain tax for investments in unlisted 
companies for longer than 24 months.
India offers a strong infrastructure for Fintech startups from around the world, which are 
planning to start their operations or are planning to expand to the Indian subcontinent. A few 
of the key parameters that portray the opportunities present are as follows.
Financial Inclusion and Enablement: The launch of ‘Jan Dhan Yojana’ scheme, 
aimed at providing a bank account for every individual and increase banking 
penetration, was launched in 2014 and has added more than 240 million bank 
accounts in the past three years. Fintech startups with their asset-light model 
can build on this infrastructure by providing easy-to-use and efficient transaction 

10
services (P2P, C2B or B2C) across financial services segments like micropayments, 
lending, insurance, mutual funds and others. 
A growing digital population: With around 370 million Internet users in India, the 
Internet penetration still lies at less than 40%. This is expected to grow in the near 
future continuing the 2x growth witnessed in 2015 in rural population coupled with 
government initiatives such as ‘Digital India’ aimed at penetrating digital services. 
The growth is expected to increase the penetration of current Fintech startups as 
well as provide a new market for potential new solutions and new players.
Promoting non-cash transactions: In order to reduce the amount of paper cash 
being used in day-to-day transactions, the government has taken certain proactive 
steps like tax rebates for merchants accepting more than 50% as electronic 
payment.
Biometric identification database: Aadhaar, the government’s initiative to create 
a central identification database, now holds the information of over 1 billion Indian 
citizens. This is being leveraged for eKYC and financial benefit transfer schemes. 
It also helps firms to reduce the time and effort required for first-time customer 
verification. DBS, a global bank, has launched their mobile-only banking platform 
called Digibank, which leverages Aadhaar for customer verification.
On the regulators’ side, India’s central banking institution and regulator Reserve Bank of 
India (RBI) has put in place new guidelines in 2014 relaxing the rule for requirement of 
customers to undergo a KYC process for transactions up to INR 10,000 per month through 
prepaid instruments. This guideline allows consumers to download a wallet of choice and 
use them for transactional services such as booking tickets, P2P remittance and paying bills 
without the need for documentation or photographs.
Source: LTP

11
With an approximate 70% of the bill payments from top 20 cities amounting to around USD 
100 billion estimated to be paid by cash, the RBI has launched the Bharat Bill Payment 
System (BBPS). BBPS will enhance the current bill payment infrastructure, which is biller-
specific in terms of mode of payment and channels supported to provide customers with 
‘anytime, anywhere’ payment options. BBPS will function as a tiered structure for operating 
the bill payment system in the country. India’s umbrella organization for payments, National 
Payments Corporation of India (NPCI), will function as the authorized Bharat Bill Payment 
Central Unit (BBPCU), which will be responsible for setting business standards, rules and 
procedures for technical and business requirements for all the participants. NPCI, as the 
BBPCU, will also undertake clearing and settlement activities related to transactions routed 
through BBPS. As on date, 62 entities have received in-principle approval from RBI to 
function as Operating Units, out of which 52 are banking and 10 are non-banking entities. 
ItzCash, Paytm, Oxigen, PayU are some of the Fintech startups that are part of this project. 
Another popular Fintech initiative is the launch of UPI, a modern payment infrastructure that 
is expected to be launched by 18+ banks and Fintech startup partners. Apart from these 
initiatives, the RBI in June 2016 has also set up a multi-disciplinary committee to study the 
Fintech business in India. The committee is expected to study the new models of innovation, 
provide a framework and guidance for Fintech startups, and also develop infrastructure to 
promote innovation. 
Fintech startups, banks and the government’s recent activities have hence paved the way for 
institutionalised startup activities. This has led to the emergence of specialized accelerators 
and incubators that are covered in the next section. 
2.4 Accelerators and Incubators
India is considered as one of the top five countries in terms of number of startups. This is 
set to further increase with digital and smart city initiatives taken by the government of India 
that are focused on building a connected technology infrastructure in the country. Such an 
infrastructure would ease the process of customer onboarding and connectivity for Fintech 
startups. At the time of compiling this report, 13+ Fintech incubators and accelerators exist 
in India. Some Fintech-specific accelerators/incubators are outlined below.
PayPal, which has been at the heart of Fintech innovation, launched Start Tank incubator 
in 2013. The incubator provides an obligation-free environment to startups to use their 
facility. A few Fintech startups that have taken part in their incubation program are CashFree, 
D-Rewards, Notifie and ftcash.
Rainmatter and K-start, both incubators, not only provide mentorship and technological 
benefits to startups, but also provide funding opportunities (US $100–500k) for scaling the 
startup operations.

12
A new trend can be witnessed in India, where banks have started partnering with 
accelerators and Incubators to show their support to the Fintech startups. As such, 
YES bank has partnered with India’s largest incubator T-Hub to provide Fintech startups 
products, payment gateways and open APIs. Similarly, Axis Bank has launched Thought 
Factory to help accelerate the development of innovative technology solutions for the 
banking sector. One of India’s leading startup accelerator ‎Zone Startups located at the iconic 
Bombay Stock Exchange building, runs majority of corporate Fintech programs such as 
Barclays’ Rise accelerator program, Thomson Reuters’s Fintech Innovation Challenge, and 
Axis Bank’s startup accelerator program. 
With an economically favorable environment for Fintech startups and both private and 
public players actively supporting them, one main element influencing the strength of the 
ecosystem is the availability of talent. As the next section outlines, there is an abundance of 
Indian technical and business talent ripe to be included in startup activities. 
2.5 Human Resources
India offers a large fresh talent pool for Fintech companies from engineering background 
that has an estimated average of 850,000 graduate and post-graduate students from various 
fields of engineering in India. Engineers from institutions such as the Indian Institute of 
Technology (IIT) and other world-class institutes constitute approximately 3.8% of the total 
Engineering graduates that are available for Fintech companies to hire. India is also the 
largest English-speaking nation after the USA. Though majority of these fresh graduates may 
not be immediately deployable to jobs – an on-the-job technical training investment for fresh 
graduate hires is a normal industry practice in India.
For MBA graduate hiring, India has some of the world’s best business schools, that rank in 
top 100 such as ISB Hyderabad, IIM Ahmedabad, IIM Bangalore and IIM Calcutta. On an 
estimated average, there are about 220,000 MBA graduating in India every year.
Apart from the vast fresh talent, India also has approximately 2.5 million professionals in 
financial services for lateral hiring. For many years, India has been a destination for major 
financial services to outsource their processes. Apart from outsourcing, leading global 
financial services firms have set their captive centres in India. The outsourcing and captive 
arms of financial services were present in India for more than two decades and this has 
led to the development of mature models of outsourcing. Starting from voice process 
outsourcing, businesses have graduated to developing process-critical solutions such as 
infrastructure services and automation across financial services via outsourcing and captive 
centres. This has made a skillful and knowledgeable workforce widely available. Banks have 
been changing their model of the global extended team to service delivery model in India 
which has resulted in setting up various captive centres and centres of excellence. Danske 

13
Bank opened its captive centre in Bangalore in 2015, Deutsche Bank has set its captive in 
Bangalore, Pune, Mumbai and Jaipur and Credit Suisse has set up its Centre of Excellence 
in Pune.
Hence, the emergence of Fintech in India has been supported by entrepreneurial activities of 
early Fintech startups, the initiatives taken by banks, the government and incubators as well 
as the abundance of innovative talent. The report will now discuss how this emerging Fintech 
market in India is different from similar spaces around the world and the elements that make 
it special and appealing for Swiss startups. 
“The cost of technology and talent is not high in India so we 
have an unbeatable advantage.”
Mr. Mohandas Pai, Chairman, Manipal Global Education 
Services and Aarin Capital
Source: LTP

14
3.
What makes 
Fintech in 
India unique?
 
As was outlined in the previous section of this report, Fintech has been thriving in India for 
the last few years. However unlike more developed markets in Europe and North America, 
India’s recent emergence as an economic powerhouse renders comparisons to these 
markets more difficult. This section aims at outlining what makes Fintech in India unique by 
firstly drawing the comparison to other global Fintech hubs. It will then proceed to discuss 
the most active segments in Indian Fintech – payments and lending – and finally offer an 
overview of the main innovations and challenges present in the current market. 
Fintech in India is unique because it is young, growing rapidly, and is fuelled by a large 
market base. With internet penetration and mobile usage expected to increase rapidly from 
53% in 2014 to 64% by 2018, India provides an attractive market for technology startups. 
The financial services market in India is largely untapped – 40% of the population is currently 
not connected to banks and more than 80% of the payments in India are still made by cash. 
This untapped Indian Fintech market provides a robust opportunity to significantly increase 
demand in almost every category – consumer lending, insurance, trade finance, digital 
payments and many more. In each of these areas, new Fintech solutions can help the market 
to grow significantly. 
However, some areas are more strongly represented in the Indian Fintech market. The next 
few pages are dedicated to highlighting these focus areas. 
3.1 Comparing India versus other Fintech hubs globally
Source: LTP

15
With the United States, Hong Kong, Singapore and the United Kingdom blooming as global 
hubs for Fintech, India has only recently emerged as a key player. However, India holds a 
lot of promise as it provides the right mix of technical skills, government support, regulatory 
policies and the business environment for startups to flourish. For example, UPI in India is 
unlike anything available in the United States or the United Kingdom. 
Some of the key characteristics of the Indian market that make it exciting and interesting for 
Fintech startups are: 
•	
India is the only Fintech hub that provides ample opportunity to target large unbanked 
population. Coupled with the growing young population who readily accept new 
technologies, India makes an attractive destination for Fintech startups.
•	
The difficult exercise to change consumer behaviour towards accepting Fintech 
solutions is already underway.
•	
The broad level of technical education provides India with a strong talent pipeline of a 
comparatively cost efficient and easy-to-hire tech workforce.
•	
India has the second biggest startup ecosystem in APAC after China measured in deal 
size and number of deals. 
Overall, India is confidently moving up the Fintech ladder and provides plenty of 
opportunities for Fintech startups to enter the diversified market and be successful provided 
a careful solution-customer match and a strong go-to-market strategy is in place. The two 
broad segments where Fintech is most active in India are payments and lending. Out of 
the more than 600 Fintech startups currently active in India, around 40% are payments and 
lending startups. The next few pages will hence dedicate special attention to these two 
Fintech segments. 

16
“Indian startups can go global. In case of insurance, 
the regulations globally are not vastly diff erent; the 
market dynamics however are distinct, infl uenced by the 
demographics and evolutionary state of the industry. If 
startups can fi ne tune their product off erings for market 
adoption, they can eye global expansion.”
Mr. Amit Kalra, Senior Vice President, Head Strategic 
Initiatives and Analytics unit at Swiss Re, Bangalore
3.2 Payments
The payment space is the most competitive segment and provides a strong growth potential: 
In the last 3–4 years, India has witnessed robust activities in payments. As such, the number 
of prepaid instruments transactions in 2015 to 2016 is almost twice of mobile banking 
transactions. The competitive payment space in India ranges from telecom companies, 
banks, wallet companies, e-commerce and technology fi rms and is highly likely to include 
payment banks in the future. 
Source: LTP
Source: LTP

17
Between 2009 and 2010, RBI issued 26 prepaid payment instrument (PPI) licenses. Two 
types of PPI exist in India now: Mobile Wallets and Prepaid Cards. 
•	
Mobile Wallets are app-based stored-value accounts, funded through credit/debit cards 
or via net banking. Paytm, Freecharge, MobiKwik, and Citrus (acquired by PayU) are 
some of the prominent Fintech firms operating in this space. Currently, these wallets 
are majorly used for mobile recharges, bill payments and online commerce. They are 
backed by VC funding and are spending heavily on customer acquisition through 
marketing initiatives. They are also expanding their services through tie-ups with cab 
services, retail stores, educational institutions and fuel stations to increase reach and 
usage of their wallet services. The wallet companies are also reaching the unbanked 
and underbanked through innovative solutions such as MobiKwik cash pick up service 
and Paytm tie-up with ICICI Bank for cash loading. Wallets are growing in popularity 
and several companies have applied for licenses with the total number of PPI licenses 
growing to 46 in 2016.
•	
Prepaid cards on the other hand have been promoted by startups including Oxigen, 
ItzCash, Suvidhaa and others, which provide solutions with an agent-assisted offering 
to consumers who are not digitally well equipped. The primary usage of prepaid cards 
is for expense management, remittances and railway booking. Other technology 
firms and startups have also penetrated the PPI competitive space by acquisitions to 
provide in-house wallet or payment solutions. Examples include Snapdeal acquiring 
Freecharge, Flipkart’s acquisition of FxMart to offer Flipkart money and Amazon 
acquired Emvantage. 
Apart from PPIs, another exciting development in the payments space is the so-called 
Payment Banks - new, stripped-down versions of banks conceptualized by the RBI. These 
banks are expected to reach their customer via digital channels and provide transaction 
services for the migrant labour market in India. The scope of activities these entities are 
permitted to undertake include acceptance of demand deposits up to USD 1,700  (INR 
100,000) per customer, issuance of debit cards, offering payment and remittance services, 
acting as a business correspondent to other banks, distribution of mutual funds, insurance 
and more. They cannot undertake any lending activities, issue credit cards, accept NRI 
deposits or be a virtual bank. Payment Banks face the challenge of their inability to earn 
lending revenues and high rates of interest on floats due to the regulation of investing 
deposits in government securities.
As it would be economically inefficient for banks to open branches in every village, Payment 
Banks are expected to provide a digital alternative for the large unbanked population. This 
is expected to drive India’s journey into a cashless economy and is being compared to the 
success of Vodafone’s M-Pesa in Kenya where an estimated 70% of the population uses 
M-Pesa for domestic remittances and low-value purchases. Payment banks could also play 

18
a crucial role in implementing government benefit transfer schemes.
In 2015, RBI provided in-principal approval to 11 entities to set up Payment Banks. Entities 
that received these licenses are Airtel, Vodafone, Reliance Jio, Uninor, Idea, Mahindra 
Finance, Cholamandalam, Paytm, NSDL, FinoPayTech and India Post. Cholamandalam, 
Uninor and Mahindra have already returned their in-principle license to RBI.
However, companies with the long-term vision, existing infrastructure and capital in place 
are looking at this solution as a major strategic bet and have laid down the roadmap for their 
operations. Paytm plans to start its operations by end of 2016 and India Post has received 
51 applications from all over the globe for partnerships in setting up their payments bank 
and has stated that they would start operations by early 2017.
In summary, there are a large number of Fintech startups focused on payments. The above 
examples illustrate that they are rapidly evolving given changing use cases, customer 
propositions and business models. The support of a favourable regulatory environment 
combined with the young demographic willing to try and test new technologies, the Indian 
payments industry is a great place for Fintech startups to explore.
3.3 Alternative Lending
Another strong element in Fintech space in India is Alternative Lending. The major block of 
lending in India is still held in the form of community finance where family and community 
members, as well as offline lenders, dominate the space. Some experts feel that community 
finance is as big as the traditional bank consumer lending. The average annual market rate 
for such offline and unsecured loans is approximately 30%, which is almost 2–2.5 times the 
rate of an average personal loan charged by banks. Community lending has been thriving 
due to it being largely unregulated and a commonly accepted scheme of functioning among 
the unbanked and underbanked. However, with increasing financial inclusion and digital 
penetration, there have been an increasing number of startups that are looking at targeting 
this lending mechanism. Eight alternative lending startups feature among India’s 50 most 
well funded Fintech startups.
“Lending is a key area. Credit Suisse believes there is a US $ 
600 billion opportunity within [the] lending space.”
Mr. Nandan Nilekani, Former Chairman - Unique 
Identification Authority of India
Source: LTP

19
Unsecured consumer lending as of today has largely been confined to the metros. There 
have been innovative technology-savvy solutions that have been targeted towards the 
urban crowd who are looking at alternative credit due to two reasons, for ease of access 
to funds where the technological process does not require huge documentation and large 
wait times which have been common requirements for bank lending and the other reason is 
lack of credit scoring where the growing young population of the country has largely been 
away from loans and hence, lacks any existing credit record. As a result, this segment does 
not have credit scores from Credit Information Bureau India Limited, which collects and 
maintains records of an individual’s payments pertaining to loans and credit cards.
More recently, P2P (peer to peer) and segment-based lending have been gaining 
prominence. Fintech startups have developed solutions that provide superior customer 
experience and faster processing times for lending. P2P lending platforms act as an 
aggregator for lenders and borrowers to enable creating a match between both the parties. 
Faircent and i-lend are two of the prominent players in the P2P lending space. 
Some of the startups have been involved in the activity of targeting microfinance with the 
goal of creating a social impact and providing easier access to credit to small entrepreneurs. 
For example, players like crowdfunding platforms Milaap and Rang De have used the social 
chord in order to develop their platform as well to have an impact on farmers and rural 
population.
Segment-based lending, on the other hand, includes players like EarlySalary that focuses 
on younger working population for providing loans. They give out loans from USD 150 to US 
$1500 (INR 10,000 up to INR 100,000) based on the borrower’s salary for a tenure of 7 to 30 
days. Such segment-focused startups are at an early stage and could be a very attractive 
segment for new Fintech solutions. 
However, as discussed earlier, a major chunk of these solutions are currently being targeted 
at the urban audience, leaving behind the rural and unbanked sector where the maximum 
potential lies. One major reason for such ignorance of Indian rural users has been the 
difficulty in collecting data around the unorganized Indian rural segment. There is a growing 
interest in solutions that can incorporate these unorganized data pointers, largely qualitative, 
to provide a comprehensive understanding of the tier-II and tier-III market. Traditional Non-
Banking Financial Companies such as IFMR Holdings and agent-based new age financing 
players such as Equitas Holdings and Ujjivan Financial Services, that caters to unbanked 
urban poor, have made big strides in this space. These players have built strong algorithms 
that have been improved iteratively with the addition of multiple data pointers gathered not 
only from technology but also from on-field agents. 
The traditional business lending segment is yet to witness major disruptions in the Indian 
context. The huge financing requirements and decades of trust and relationship between 

20
financial institutions and business have been tough to crack. However, the SME sector and 
the emerging digital business sector have started to take the alternative lending approach. 
Solutions such as receivables financing, equipment finance and to a certain extent mortgage 
finance have seen traction among the startups.
In spite of the pivotal role it plays in the country’s economy, the SME sector suffers on 
account of inadequate financial access with an estimated USD 50 billion gap in SME credit. 
Fintech startups are allowing SMEs to focus on building their business by taking care of the 
gaps in SMEs capital requirements. The credit risk analysis is done digitally so that loans 
are provided in less than 48 hours. Startups in SME financing like IndiaLends, Lendingkart 
and Faircent have gained a lot of attention from the investor community. Invoice financing 
startups such as KredX is into invoice discounting to solve the problems of working capital 
of micro, small and medium enterprises by releasing the cash tied up in customer invoices 
that would otherwise be paid in 30 to 90 days. Another example is Instakash, a mobile data 
analytics company applying AI and machine learning to create financial products, focused 
on consumers and SMBs, to simplify financial access for the next-generation users. They 
are leveraging the overall growth of new-age startups and have developed dedicated loan 
products to meet those demands and have specific car loan products to finance Uber, Ola 
and other taxi-hailing service drivers.
Bank technology solutions startups aim to partner with banks to enhance loan origination 
and servicing capabilities. These include startups which provide digital onboarding, 
underwriting technology and loan servicing capabilities. This segment has seen widespread 
development in markets like the US and the UK but is yet to take off in the Indian market, 
providing a major opportunity for Fintech startups. 
Overall, Swiss startups looking to enter the alternative lending market in India can take a 
cue from above examples and incorporate a mix of online and offline models to cater to the 
services of this still largely unpenetrated market. Startups can build solutions to provide an 
easy-to-use, low-cost, and better alternative lending for the borrowers and an alternative 
investment vehicle for retail and institutional investors. 
3.4 Innovation in the Indian Fintech market
Two key innovation drivers, Aadhar and UPI have huge potential to push the Indian Fintech 
ecosystem ahead.
Firstly, one of the most innovative initiatives to come out of India is Aadhaar, which acts 
as the core for India Stack initiative. ‘India Stack’ is a term used to explain a set of public 
APIs targeted at customer verification, digitizing identity, payments and secure personal 
digital content. It is led by iSPIRT, a non-profit industry body working with various volunteer 

21
technology leaders, regulators and government agencies. 
The very base of India stack is Aadhaar – the national digital ID program. Aadhaar extends 
to a billion Indians a powerful biometric database that can be accessed by any service 
provider. This is a huge milestone for India as until recently millions of Indians had no 
formal government identification. The data collected by Aadhaar forms the very foundation 
for electronic customer verification (eKYC), replacing the laborious physical verification 
previously required for financial transactions. This also cuts the time and cost of processing 
transactions by 50–80% depending on the product and service. Aadhaar is a gigantic step 
taking India forward and changing the economics of providing financial services to masses. 
The reason for Aadhaar’s success has been the support that it has gathered over the years 
from various entities. Major Indian regulators such as RBI, SEBI (securities), IRDA (insurance) 
and TRAI (telecom) have widely accepted the Aadhaar-based eKYC. 
“India Stack led by Nandan and iSPIRT is the going to be 
biggest disruptor in the financial services space.”
Mr. Mohandas Pai, Chairman, Manipal Global Education 
Services and Aarin Capital
The second innovative initiative is Unified Payments Interface (UPI) with the aim to transform 
payments. It is an open API that banks can deploy to allow phone-to-phone payment 
transfers directly from bank accounts. The future of UPI is compelling – it will allow 1 
billion plus mobile phones which will be used for everything from P2P transfers, local store 
payments, migrant labourer payments and other user cases. If we look closely at the impact 
that UPI will have on Fintech players, it is a blessing in disguise for payment agnostic 
players. Furthermore, it is expected to have a negative impact on players that have built non-
interoperable and siloed products for example digital wallets, net banking network providers 
and card network providers. Overall, the success of UPI depends on its mass adoption and 
it is highly dependent on companies, developers, merchants and even customers to make 
sure that it achieves its full potential.
Source: LTP

22
3.5 Challenges facing Indian Fintech industry
With all these positive developments in Fintech, India needs to address some important 
challenges.
Firstly, the absence of broad-based financial transaction infrastructure, which has been 
a major challenge as several Indians in rural parts of India do not have bank accounts, 
credit score and home ownership details. This has played a vital role in the lack of financial 
services penetration. For example, loans or lending in India is tedious and time-consuming 
as regulations demand physical documents for identification proof, pay slips, notary copies 
of all documents, verification of signatures, in-person verification, and physical inspection 
of property. Due to the lack of relevant financial data, the risk of lending to millions of 
undocumented and unverifiable Indians is very high even though they satisfy the income 
sufficiency test. 
“Fintech startups must know how to sell their technology and 
make it seamless.”
Mr. Mohandas Pai, Chairman, Manipal Global Education 
Services and Aarin Capital
Secondly, as the native digital and financially literate population is low, the current set of 
financial products and services do not cater to the vast majority of Indians and are only 
designed for the top 40 million of the population. There are about 400 million Indians who 
earn between USD 3,000 to USD 15,000 a year and their needs have not been addressed 
yet. Bala Srinivasa, Partner at Kalaari Capital feels that this is an opportunity for Fintech 
startups in India and incumbents to capitalize and to reimagine the needs of the rest of the 
population.
Finally, there is a dire need for innovation in developing segment-specific vertical products 
unique to India. India has already seen a glimpse of it including small ticket of unsecured 
loans, prepaid plans for single medical procedures, instant point-of-sale credit, pay-per-day 
insurance, micro-investment products and others. Currently, startups have not gone in-depth 
to understand the segment and create solutions that are usable, affordable and profitable. 
For instance, solutions such as credit schemes focused on woman entrepreneurs, social 
financing and crowd financing are areas that are yet to see any large-scale disruptions. 
Addressing these challenges by not only building on the innovations already initiated by 
Indian Fintech startups, but also by building disruptive solutions, can provide an unique 
opportunity for startups to profit from the large Indian Fintech market. 
Source: LTP

23
4.
Case Studies
This section offers a glimpse of selective domains that stand out in the Indian Fintech 
market. It discusses InsurTech and is then followed by two case studies of companies that 
have done particularly well in India. 
4.1 Insurtech – the new kid on the block
Apart from traditional segments such as payments, lending and fund management, India 
offers a good potential in many other segments. One such segment is insurance where 
InsurTech startups can have deeper impact and possibilities to disrupt the market.
India is attractive from an InsurTech perspective due to the size of its significantly 
underinsured population. According to the global reinsurer SwissRe, the Indian insurance 
penetration stands at 3.4% in 2015 compared to a global average of 6.2%. Insurance 
penetration refers to premiums as a percentage of GDP. The insurance sector in India was 
liberalized in 1999, which marked the end of the monopoly of LIC (Life Insurance of India, the 
largest public sector insurance provider), and the number of companies increased from two 
prior to 1999 to 53 in 2016. Approximately half of these 53 companies provide life insurance 
and the other half deal in non-life insurance matters.
As the second-most populous country in the world, India constitutes for approximately 2% 
of the life insurance and 0.66% of the non-life insurance premium paid globally. Premium 
income has witnessed a growth of 22.5% in 2015–16 (April 2015 to March 2016) and 
reached INR 1.38 trillion. The increase in savings of households and the growth of the 
economy is expected to increase premiums and investment into insurance policies.
Apart from the market potential, the government has been taking initiatives such as 
increased FDI limit to 49%, increased tax incentives for health insurance schemes, schemes 
to provide insurance for the unorganized sector workers that can be seen as favorable 
factors for increased penetration in the next few years. Government schemes launched in 
the last two years include the Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana, which is a personal 
accident insurance scheme and the Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana, which is 
the government’s life insurance scheme. The two major schemes launched in the past two 
years offer basic insurance at minimal rates and can be easily availed of through various 
government agencies and private sector outlets.
Fintech startups can play a major role in both enabling established insurance firms and in 
designing new types of insurance products. In terms of infrastructure, digital distribution 
is expected to save life insurance companies 10–20% in costs while it is expected to save 
20–30% for non-life insurance companies. Also, the online channel is expected to drive 
50% of life insurance and 75% of non-life insurance of the USD 165 billion of new insurance 
sales in 2020. Currently, the sales and distributions are largely paper-driven and startups 
that provide or build this infrastructure can partner with insurance firms to provide digital 

24
distribution channel. Apart from digital distribution, algorithms could be created for data 
capture and cross sales, enhanced customer engagement and conversion, and enhanced 
underwriting technology, which could be provided for insurance firms to better price and 
segment their offerings.
In terms of product, with non-life insurance penetration at 0.8%, very few products exist for 
traditional segments such as crop insurance, micro-insurance, motor insurance and health 
insurance sectors. Startups with strong underwriting capabilities can develop unique models 
for the Indian market and develop/design products that cater to the specific needs of the 
segment. Also, in non-life insurance, the emergence of IoT coupled with the smart city and 
connected devices initiatives of the government can lead to new underwriting models in the 
insurance industry.
Currently, PolicyBazaar and Coverfox are the two main InsurTech companies that have been 
notably doing well in India. The companies have formulated a unique aggregator model for 
both life and non-life insurance and have gained traction from VCs due to the potential for 
digital sales in the insurance sector. They are ensuring to educate customers not only on 
policies and their availability but also on the kind of insurance a particular customer needs, 
thus creating awareness for products in the consumer’s mind.

25
Payments and wallets are a highly competitive segment in India with a large number of 
global and local players. However, with 80% of the transaction still being done by cash, cost 
eff ective digital payment solutions specifi cally in the micro-transaction services segment, 
have a good potential for growth. To fi ght the large established Fintech players, access to 
capital would be a major requirement for new solutions enabling plain wallet services. With 
simple value added services, startups can expect higher customer loyalty and traction. 
PayTM – from Fintech startup to India’s 
largest payment company
Paytm, India’s largest payment company, was launched in 2010 as a mobile 
recharge service provider and has evolved gradually to an e-commerce 
marketplace in 2014. The company then increased its services by providing 
bus tickets in 2015 and introduced movie tickets and fl ight tickets in 2016 
through its portal.
After providing various value-added services for telecom operators, Vijay 
Shekar Sharma launched Paytm in 2010 as an online prepaid mobile recharge 
portal. As they were one of the fi rst to provide this service, they increased 
the customer base rapidly and soon expanded Paytm as a semi-closed 
wallet in 2013–14. They then moved into multiple business ventures – movie 
tickets, wallet integration to other commerce applications (online & mobile), 
e-commerce and others. Riding on the trend of rapid mobile penetration in 
India and also the fact that the user will spend more time online, Paytm has 
created over 100 million wallets carrying out over 75 million transactions per 
month.
Paytm aims to be the fi rst profi table e-commerce venture in India by refi ning 
its O2O (online-to-offl  ine and offl  ine-to-online) business strategy. O2O refers 
to consumers being able to search and buy across channels. For example, a 
consumer would be able to search for a particular product online but purchase 
the same at the closest offl  ine outlet and vice versa. It has acquired hyperlocal 
service marketplace Near.in and invested in delivery enabling startups Jugnoo, 
an online aggregator of auto-rickshaw services and Little, a platform that helps 
consumers fi nd deals at nearby outlets to enhance their O2O model.
Apart from O2O, Paytm has a strong focus on data science and uses them to 
identify Stock Keeping Units which help in increasing the margins and also in 
fi ghting card fraud.
With its payment bank license granted from the RBI, Paytm will be able to 
open checking/savings bank accounts. It plans to use this as a platform to 
further enable micro transactions via its wallet and also as a revenue source by 
cross-selling fi nancial products. Paytm has received a total funding of around 
USD 740 million with Alibaba being its leading investor, owning close to a 25% 
stake.

26
Zerodha – India’s discount brokerage 
platform for the 21st century
Launched in 2010, Zerodha is India’s fi rst provider of electronic discount 
brokerage platform and is known for pioneering the zero-brokerage concept in 
India. It currently caters to around 120,000 clients with average daily turnovers 
of USD 1.5–1.8 billion in equities and USD 150 million in commodities. It has 
generated revenue of USD 25 million and a profi t of 10 million in 2015.
The company has disrupted the traditional model of brokerage in India 
where it charges a fi xed fee per executed transaction rather than charging a 
percentage of the total traded. This has helped Zerodha in targeting clients 
that execute large volumes of trade in futures and options and exempted them 
in paying high-broking charges. This has led to a vast growth in the number 
of customers they serve. Apart from the low fees, the company has also 
built diff erent off erings for diff erent trading segments. It has a total of seven 
off erings, each catering to futures, equity, options, commodity and currency 
segments.
The company plans to grow its customer base to 1 million by 2017. In order 
to reach this target, Zerodha recently launched its platform in 11 regional 
languages and has a strong strategy including product launches, new service 
off erings and customer education.
The company has taken steps to educate the customer in understanding 
their trading habits and how to evolve to be a better trader by launching tools 
such as Q, Quant and Open Trade. These tools not only help customers in 
understanding their trading habits but also help them in picking trade updates 
from profi table traders based on their trading style and help them in gaining 
customer loyalty. The educational initiatives undertaken by the company 
include an active fi nance blog which explains the key terms of trading and 
also educates consumers on how to make trading and long-term bets and free 
expert training videos on YouTube. 
Rainmatter, a Fintech Incubator is another key initiative by Zerodha which 
helps to bring innovative solutions to the market. Rainmatter provides startups 
with APIs, research, and mentoring and fi nancial support. Zerodha invested 
USD 375,000 in April 2015 in Tradelab, a stockbroking and analytical software. 
This solution was later provided as an integrated off ering in one of Zerodha’s 
product, ‘Pi’.
Investments management is a high growth segment for startups. With a lower number of 
startup solutions, multiple subsegments could be targeted and could off er Fintech solution 
providers the fi rst mover advantage. However, customer education is a key requirement for 
acceptance of these solutions in India. 

27
According to the data of MEDICI research, an estimated 90% of the Fintech startups in 
Switzerland are from investments platform, payments, InsurTech, virtual currency and 
blockchain, security and analytics, and personal finance management segments. These 
segments also hold promise in the Indian Fintech space. 
Increasing financial inclusion and regulators opening up licenses for innovative solutions 
are expected to drive India’s Fintech market. A few major areas that are ripe for disruptive 
solutions in the Indian context are InsurTech, analytics, artificial intelligence, and investments 
platform. 
“Swiss Fintech have an opportunity in India, if they have 
deep domain expertise. Fintech opportunity is big and next 
10 years would be interesting. Asset management/Wealth 
Management and Insurance are great areas.”
Mr. Nandan Nilekani, Former Chairman - Unique 
Identification Authority of India
As described above, lending is a growing segment in India. However, the major challenges 
financial institutions and startups face are in underwriting the risk for unorganized data. Any 
established analytics platform, which can provide such services, would be a great success 
in the Indian context. Also, fraud and security are a major focus area for banks as well as 
Fintech startups, especially in transaction and payment services. With the launch of modern 
payment instruments such as UPI and the increasing usage of wallets and cards, there is 
also the issue of fraudulent transactions that needs to be tackled. Hence, major entities 
invest heavily in this space. Swiss startups in data management, security, and fraud analytics 
space could consider providing their solutions and establishing their presence in the Indian 
market. 
InsurTech startups that can provide digital services are expected to gain interest from 
investors, insurance firms and consumers. According to Amit Kalra, Senior Vice President 
Head of Strategic Initiatives at SwissRe, which is running the first InsurTech accelerator 
in India “insurance is a 4.6-trillion-dollar-industry and has been largely conventional- the 
current startups are working just on the surface and has a strong potential to be disrupted 
by innovative ideas, business models and technology led solutions.”
With a high-growth economy, growing savings and higher financial literacy and awareness of 
investments, the scope for investment management services is huge. Established firms are 
looking for solution providers who can work with them to not only enhance but also expand 
5.
Opportunities 
and 
Challenges 
Source: LTP

28
their offerings. According to Nithin Kamath, Founder and CEO of Zerodha which runs Fintech 
incubator Rainmatter technologies, “in India when you hear about financial technology, 
it’s mostly wallets and online payments. We’re more interested in startups that focus on 
money management [and] trading in markets.” Rainmatter is specifically scouting for foreign 
startups. This provides an opportunity for Swiss startups eager to explore the Indian market 
for their international expansion.
“Swiss startups have a fair chance in the Indian InsurTech 
space. Any idea/solution with technology as a core has 
no borders. Swiss startups can surely apply to our global 
InsurTech accelerator programme in Bangalore.” 
“We have global VCs in India and I am sure they would 
be open to fund Swiss start-ups which establish their 
proposition in the Indian market. With right validation in both 
developed and emerging markets, they will have strong future 
prospects.”
Mr. Amit Kalra, Senior Vice President, Head Strategic 
Initiatives and Analytics unit at Swiss Re, Bangalore
Swiss startups could also use the support of home grown global banks like UBS. UBS offers 
its small-business customers, bexio (a startup), that focuses on cloud-based accounting 
software. Andreas Kubli, Head of Multichannel and Digitization in UBS Switzerland, feels that 
the partnership model with bexio will become a “blueprint” to replicate in other countries. 
Credit Suisse, another Swiss multinational financial services holding company, is an active 
promoter of Fintech startup hubs and incubators globally. It plays a mentor-like role in 
evaluating Fintech startups in Switzerland across segments such as artificial intelligence, 
crowdfunding and robotics, and provides mentorship from their staff. Swiss startups, which 
are planning to enter India, can become a mentee under the guidance of Credit Suisse India.
Apart from Swiss banks, Fintech startups can also look at several Indian banks such as 
HDFC bank, State Bank of India, Federal bank, RBL, ICICI bank among others who have 
either allocated funds or created special divisions to engage with the Fintech startup 
ecosystem.
Swiss startups are likely to face the same set of challenges that Indian startups are going 
through, namely raising capital, acquiring customers and monetisation. Raising capital 
is a competitive exercise, as there are a huge number of new startups fighting in a tight 
funding environment. Customer acquisition is another hurdle where the vast majority of the 
Source: LTP

29
addressable market in India is offline and the cost involved in bringing them online is quite 
high. Monetisation or being profitable is also an issue that startups face. This is partly due to 
the fact that multiple startups in India have grown by the freebies route, where they initially 
provide the service for free or at a huge discount and are yet to enter the profitability phase. 
The other challenge that Swiss startups could face is the ‘me-too’ solution providers, where 
new startups providing similar solutions are fast to emerge and also localize their offerings to 
the market needs. 
To make a mark in Indian Fintech, Swiss startups must adopt a hybrid model which is a 
combination of online and offline strategy to acquire customers. As the market matures and 
services such as eKYC, digital verifications and digital payments become more common, 
Swiss startups could rapidly shift to a complete online model in India.

30
Innovation in financial services has been growing across the value chain – from product 
development, packaging, and delivery, to services. Technological advancement coupled with 
commoditization trends has led to the development of a new crop of nimble firms providing 
services in each segment of financial institutions offerings. Fintech startups are redrawing 
the traditional approach to banking services. However, the ability of these startups to match 
and – in many cases – surpass the offerings and trust the consumer has built with a bank will 
be a KPI in the long term. 
The increasing economic power coupled with the sheer number of end-users in the APAC 
region make an attractive case for Fintech. India, the fastest-growing economy of the world 
is also home to the second-largest number of Fintech startups in APAC with China leading 
the pack. The growth in Fintech solutions has seen huge uptick in the last couple of years. 
This is further expected to grow with the renewed interest from banks and regulatory bodies. 
Banks have started to actively participate in the Fintech boom by looking for partnerships 
and investments with startups while the government and regulators are drawing new 
frameworks and policies that incentivize innovation and entrepreneurship.
Swiss startups have ample opportunities to extend their offerings and establish their 
presence in India. Below are few key pointers to consider:
•	
India provides a vast user base to startups as the population is rapidly adopting digital 
technology and hence, the scope for digital services is set to increase.
•	
India, being the home for outsourcing and captive services for decades, offers a huge 
number of fresh talent and installed talent which Swiss startups can capitalize on.
•	
Indian banks and majority of the large global firms have opened their Fintech innovation 
hubs and accelerator programs in India. This is further set to increase as this trend has 
started only in 2016.
•	
Government and regulatory bodies have developed a strong financial infrastructure that 
is being leveraged for Fintech innovation. Also, there have been multiple policies and 
initiatives aimed at promoting financial inclusion and innovative banking services.
The challenges discussed in the report remain. The need for consumer education, building 
trust, and getting the right licenses would be the major building blocks to starting up in India.
Overall, India offers a huge market for Fintech that is ripe for disruption. With rising financial 
awareness, any startup that comes to India would need to strike the right balance between 
their product and the market, invest in customer education, develop innovative business 
models and build Fintech in India.
6.
Summary and 
Conclusion

31
Live Mint, (2016). Flipkart’s PhonePe ties up with Yes Bank to launch UPI-based app. 
http://www.livemint.com/Companies/zsJlcKjrJrEeCQK3t8wWbP/Flipkarts-PhonePe-
launches-UPIbased-app.html
Business Standard (2016). Freecharge partners Axis Bank for UPI support.
http://www.business-standard.com/article/companies/freecharge-partners-axis-bank-for-
upi-support-116071700414_1.html
Yes Bank (2016). Yes Bank launches first-of-its-kind UPI proposition with 50 companies. 
https://www.yesbank.in/media/press-releases/fy-2016-17/yes-bank-launches-first-of-its-
kind-upi-proposition-with-50-companies
Let’s Talk Payments (2016). Indian banks: How They Are Partnering With the Startup 
Community, Part I. 
https://letstalkpayments.com/indian-banks-how-they-are-partnering-with-the-startup-
community-part-i/
ICICI Bank (2016). ICICI Bank launches India’s first contactless mobile payment 
solution. 
https://www.icicibank.com/aboutus/article.page?identifier=news-icici-bank-launches-indias-
first-contactless-mobile-payment-solution-20161503181731426
Let’s Talk Payments (2016). A Glimpse into the Future of Banking: India’s First Bank in 
an App. 
https://letstalkpayments.com/a-glimpse-into-the-future-of-banking-indias-first-bank-in-an-
app/
Let’s Talk Payments (2016). India Fintech Roundup. 
https://letstalkpayments.com/india-Fintech-roundup/
Let’s Talk Payments (2016). Indian Fintech Company Citrus Launches Sellfie, an 
Integrated Contextual Commerce Platform. 
https://letstalkpayments.com/indian-Fintech-company-citrus-launches-sellfie-the-worlds-
first-integrated-contextual-commerce-platform/
Yourstory (2016). No credit card? Bengaluru-based Fintech startup ZestMoney has the 
answer. 
https://yourstory.com/2016/07/zestmoney/
Economic Times (2016). Goldman Sachs looks to invest in early-stage Fintech startups 
in India. 
http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/small-biz/startups/goldman-sachs-looks-to-invest-in-
early-stage-Fintech-startups-in-india/articleshow/51828086.cms
7.
Sources

32
Financial Express (2016).  Modi powers up ‘Startup India’ campaign, unveils Rs 10,000 
crore fund. 
http://www.financialexpress.com/economy/startup-india-live-pm-narendra-modi-set-to-
launch-rs-2000-cr-mission-shortly/195933/
Business Standard (2016). Direct payment transfers going to be rule in future, says 
Jaitley. 
http://www.business-standard.com/article/news-ani/direct-payment-transfers-going-to-be-
rule-in-future-says-jaitley-116100200189_1.html
The Centre for Internet & Society (2015). India’s Internet growth and Challenges. 
http://cis-india.org/internet-governance/blog/indias-internet-growth-challenges
Live Mint (2016). Internet usage picks up in rural India. 
http://www.livemint.com/Consumer/QgM23BLpCo4ovHxA0jpOGM/Rural-India-getting-
online-faster-BCG-report.html
NDTV (2016). Aadhaar Enrolment Crosses 1 Billion Mark. 
http://www.ndtv.com/india-news/aadhaar-enrollment-crosses-1-billion-mark-ravi-shankar-
prasad-1338621
RBI (2014). Master Circular – Policy Guidelines on Issuance and Operation of Pre-paid 
Payment Instruments in India. 
https://rbi.org.in/scripts/NotificationUser.aspx?Id=8993&Mode=0
NPCI (2015). Bharat Bill Payment System (BBPS) » About Us & Background. 
http://www.npci.org.in/BBPS-about-us.aspx
The Hindu (2014). Deutsche Bank opens new back office in Pune. 
http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/companies/deutsche-bank-opens-new-back-office-
in-pune/article5785482.ece
The Indian Brand Equity Foundation (2016). Insurance Sector in India. 
http://www.ibef.org/industry/insurance-sector-india.aspx
BCG (2016). Insurance-at-Digital-20x-2020. 
http://image-src.bcg.com/BCG_COM/Insurance-at-Digital-20x-2020-Mar-2014-India_tcm21-
28795.pdf
Business Standard (2015). Insurance penetration at 10-year low.
http://www.business-standard.com/article/finance/insurance-penetration-at-a-near-10-year-
low-115062401243_1.html

33
Gadgets 360 (2015). Paytm Claims to Be India’s First 100 Million User Product. 
http://gadgets.ndtv.com/internet/news/paytm-claims-to-be-indias-first-100-million-user-
product-727380
Economic Times (2015). Alibaba in advanced talks to increase stake in Paytm to 40%; 
deal may value Indian e-tailer at Rs 23,600 crore. 
http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/articleshow/47872035.cms?utm_
source=contentofinterest&utm_medium=text&utm_campaign=cppst
Business Standard (2016). Online brokerage Zerodha eyes Singapore foray. 
http://www.business-standard.com/article/companies/online-brokerage-zerodha-eyes-
singapore-foray-116081300873_1.html
Yourstory (2015). Bootstrapped and growing at 100% YoY, Zerodha aims to transform 
the growing Fintech market. 
https://yourstory.com/2015/11/zerodha-2/
The Boston Consulting Group (2016). Digital Payments 2020. 
http://image-src.bcg.com/BCG_COM/BCG-Google%20Digital%20Payments%202020-
July%202016_tcm21-39245.pdf
KPMG (2016). Fintech in India. 
https://assets.kpmg.com/content/dam/kpmg/pdf/2016/06/Fintech-new.pdf
PwC (2015). Fintech APAC Landscape Development. 
http://www.pwc.com/sg/en/publications/assets/Fintech-startupbootcamp-apac-2015.pdf
Kalaari Capital (2016). Fintech India. 
http://www.kalaari.com/magazine/kalaari-2016-Fintech-survey-findings/
India Briefing (2016). Opportunities in India’s Emerging Fintech Sector. 
http://www.india-briefing.com/news/opportunities-india-emerging-Fintech-sector-12477.
html/
LinkedIn (2016). Bala Srinivasa, The Parallel Universe of Indian Fintech. 
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/parallel-universe-indian-Fintech-bala-srinivasa?trk=hp-feed-
article-title-comment
The Economist Intelligence Unit (2016). Swiss banks try to raise homegrown Fintech 
startups to global stage. 
https://www.eiuperspectives.economist.com/financial-services/swiss-banks-try-raise-
homegrown-Fintech-startups-global-stage

34
Fintech Switzerland (2016). Top 30 Fintech Startups in Switzerland. 
http://Fintechnews.ch/top-30-Fintech-startups-in-switzerland-2/
The Hindu Business Line (2016). Zerodha sets sights on foreign start-ups. 
http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/markets/stock-markets/zerodha-sets-sights-on-
foreign-startups/article8714844.ece
The Economic Time (2016). Meet the alternative lending startups. 
http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/small-biz/money/meet-the-alternative-lending-
startups/articleshow/53244587.cms
Reserve Bank of India (2016). Consultation Paper on Peer to Peer Lending. 
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/content/pdfs/CPERR280416.pdf
Cryptocoins news (2016). Research: Swiss Fintech Startups Lag behind other Countries. 
https://www.cryptocoinsnews.com/swiss-Fintech-lagging/


