INDIA
FINTECH 
REPORT
2ND EDITION — EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
India FinTech Report 2020
2
The India FinTech Report is a comprehensive
120+ pages study based on MEDICI’s proprietary
FinTech data of thousands of startups, deep
market intelligence derived from years of tracking
the FinTech industry, and secondary research,
refined through brain-storming sessions and in-
depth interviews with segment experts to extract
valuable market signals, identify market trends,
and develop point-of-views in the report.
MEDICI has a rich volume of information in both
quantitative
and
qualitative
forms,
curated
through
our
industry
analysis
and
market
engagement initiatives. In the secondary research
process, we conducted an in-depth study of the
Indian FinTech landscape, understanding the key
stakeholders, drivers, trends, challenges, and
opportunities. The key sources referred for the
secondary
research
process
spanned
from
company & industry reports, press releases,
government & other official sources, national &
international databases, our partners, and many
others
that
facilitated
valuable
data-driven
insights.
Primary research formed the most crucial source
of
information
gathering
for
this
study.
It
complemented
the
secondary
research
with
insights from industry veterans in Payments,
Lending, Insurance, Wealth Management, and
Corporate
Banking
segments.
Over
100
interviews were conducted with industry experts
across a span of seven months to gain the most
updated and valuable insights on segments
covered in the report.
The
qualitative
&
quantitative
findings
and
insights from these research stages were curated
by MEDICI analysts to present a comprehensive
view of the FinTech landscape. These were
further refined through years of deeply tracking
the industry developments and bringing together
the ecosystem. Please do visit the last page of this
executive summary to access the full report.
Research Methodology
MEDICI India FinTech Report in partnership with FCC of IAMAI is being released
at GLOBAL FINTECH FEST (GFF)

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
India has seen explosive growth in the number of new
ventures launched in the FinTech space driven by adoption
Note: This analysis does not include China.
The Story of India’s Emergence as a 
Leading FinTech Hub
3
The global FinTech ecosystem continues to grow at a rapid pace. Hundreds of new startups are being founded every month across
the globe. The US has been a leading destination in terms of the number of home-grown FinTech startups with a massive
contribution toward global VC funding (generally on the top every year). In 2010–2015, the US saw 2003 FinTech startups being
founded, the most for any country in the world. However, in recent years, India has come out of the shadows to emerge as one of the
fastest-growing FinTech hubs.
India’s FinTech story will be incomplete without talking about
the governmental push, which we discuss later in detail.
Drives such as demonetization proved to be a blessing in
disguise for digital transactions in general and those FinTech
companies that were able to take advantage of it in particular.
Still, this FinTech revolution has to also become a financial
inclusion revolution—and that is a much more difficult task.
Small wins will not make much difference to improve the
quality of life for underbanked or unbanked communities and
people. To understand this, let's look at India 1, India 2, and
especially India 3 (more than a billion people with lower than
$1.3K per capita). While FinTech has impacted India 1 and to
some extent, India 2, for financial inclusion, we need to cater
to India 3 as well. So far, we do not see the impact of FinTech
in India 3 except for a few companies like Kaleidofin, Eko
financial services, Jai Kisan, GramCover, PayNearby and Aye
Finance. Most startups do not operate in that segment.
While we have made significant progress in formalization with
digital ID and the ability to transact (access) with the ID and
payment rails, we must bring the costs down using
technology and create incentives (and financial education) for
India 3 to use digital money and FinTech.
Could FinTech be the solution? At scale, FinTech looks
promising from the penetration perspective. Indian mobile
wallet Paytm has more than 200 million users, including
women and rural families, who can now participate in the
digital economy. Paytm also has over 15 million acceptance
points (QR codes), making it ubiquitous (relatively).
Additionally, PhonePe has 10 million merchants as its
customer base, and Razorpay has onboarded over 0.8 million
merchants to its platform. Zerodha, an online brokerage firm,
has the largest customer base of brokerage firms and has
19.4 lakh active clients.
FinTech startups are better suited to cater to some customer
segments such as the 60 million+ SMEs in this country.
FinTech startups offer efficient and effective solutions, which
benefit SMEs by providing them with increased access to
more diverse funding options. E.g. Khatabook, one of the
fastest growing FinTechs, is digitizing the business ledger of
small merchants and kirana stores at scale. We discuss other
such segments and opportunities in the full 120+ page report.
Large tech companies are getting super-interested in
FinTech. The GAFAMs (Google, Apple, Facebook, Amazon,
Microsoft) and the Flipkart/WhatsApp(FB)/Truecallers of the
world are using their tech brainpower, user base, and data to
offer superior financial services experiences. The onslaught
has started in many countries, including India. We expect
many of them to offer a whole array of financial services in the
future. Some large home-grown companies like Reliance Jio
are new and yet powerful entrants into the FinTech space with
deep financial muscle and distribution in place. It will be
interesting to see how Jio partners with BigTech players like
FB/WhatsApp, Google (also now, investors) to solve the SME
digitization problem that spans across financial (payments,
loans) and non-financial areas (logistics).
Apart from typical FinTech startups started by first-time
entrepreneurs, there is a growing number of FinTechs by
seasoned entrepreneurs such as Sachin Bansal (ex-Flipkart
founder) and his firm Navi Technologies.
Between 2010 and 2015, India saw 1216 new FinTech
startups founded in this period. In 2014–15, there was a
massive uptick in the number of new FinTech startups; the
numbers grew from 210 in 2014 to 454 in 2015—a 116%
increase in growth. The period between 2015 to June end
2020 has seen phenomenal growth in new startups across
Payments, Lending, Wealth, and others. India’s evolution as a
progressive FinTech nation is not a miracle. It happened at
the back of executing a four-point approach. Firstly, solving
for identity in the form of Aadhaar for formalization. Secondly,
getting everyone a bank account or equivalents (PMJDY) to
store money. Thirdly, building scalable platform(s) to move
money (IMPS, UPI, BBPS, etc.). And finally, allowing banks
and FinTechs and wealth/insurance/lending players also to
access platforms like UPI, GSTN & Digi Locker to innovate.
This framework has led India to a FinTech revolution.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
NUMBER OF NEW FINTECH 
STARTUPS FOUNDED (2015–H12020)
US
India
UK
Singapore
Australia

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
India FinTech Landscape
4
This table illustrates the 
segment-wise breakup.
NUMBER OF FINTECH 
STARTUPS BY 
SEGMENTS
405
Payments
365
Lending
313
WealthTech
(Less PFM)
173
Personal Finance 
Management
111
InsurTech
58
RegTech +
Cybersecurity 
748
Other
Segments
India currently has around 2174 FinTech startups.
Here’s the breakdown: 
CITY-WISE BREAKUP (TOP 10 CITIES) 
47
133
Hyderabad
104
Chennai
Kolkata
88
Pune
Bengaluru
447
Delhi
208
35
Ahmedabad
Mumbai
437
128
Gurugram
77
Noida
Bengaluru and Mumbai lead the momentum in FinTech, and together, these cities represent 42% of the startup
headquarters. Apart from the top ﬁve FinTech destinations, which include Mumbai, Bangalore, New Delhi,
Gurugram, and Hyderabad, the rest of India accounts for 738 FinTech startups.
NCR region has 
413+ FinTechs

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Market Landscape
5
Lending: 365 Startups
WealthTech: 486 Startups
INVESTMENTS PLATFORM
ROBO-ADVISOR
OTHERS
PERSONAL FINANCE MANAGEMENT
OTHERS
P2P LENDING
AGGREGATORS
SME FINANCING
DIGITAL CONSUMER LENDING
Note: There is a growing trend of re-bundling and companies expanding into multiple segments. This representation is therefore directional in nature as companies might 
be present in more than one subsegments or segments. Please reach out to us if you want to change the segment of your company or just want to discuss the rationale. 
Some companies shown in the landscape may  have shut down operations or scaled down operations significantly during the COVID-19 period from March to June 2020.
[Illustrative]
[Illustrative]

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Market Landscape 
6
Digital Payments: 405 Startups
InsurTech: 111 Startups
CLAIMS
ONLINE FIRST INSURANCE
INTERNET OF THINGS
AGGREGATORS/POLICY MANAGEMENT
P2P PAYMENTS
PROXIMITY PAYMENTS/ACCEPTANCE
POS/MOBILE POS
MOBILE DIGITAL WALLETS
SOFTWARE/WHITELABEL/APIs
eroute technologies
a fintech company
PAYMENT GATEWAYS
BILL PAYMENTS & DIRECT MONEY TRANSFER
SOFTWARE/WHITELABEL/INFRASTRUCTURE APIs/OTHER APIs
Note: There is a growing trend of re-bundling and companies expanding into multiple segments. This representation is therefore directional in nature as companies might 
be present in more than one subsegments or segments. Please reach out to us if you want to change the segment of your company or just want to discuss the rationale. 
Some companies shown in the landscape may  have shut down operations or scaled down operations significantly during the COVID-19 period from March to June 2020.
[Illustrative]
[Illustrative]

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
India FinTech Investments Trends 
(2019-H12020)
7
STAGE-WISE BREAKUP OF TOTAL FINTECH FUNDING 
($5.4 BN) IN INDIA – 2019–H12020
Paytm
(Series G, Nov. 2019 – $1,000 Mn)
One97 
(Series G, Dec. 2019 – $668 Mn)
Navi Technologies 
(Series: Unknown, Apr. 2020 – $395 Mn)
DMI Finance
(Series: Unknown, Jan. 2020 – $230 Mn)
Policybazaar 
(Series G, Nov. 2019 – $150 Mn)
CRED 
(Series B, Aug. 2019 – $120 Mn)
Digit Insurance 
(Venture Series, Jan. 2020 – $84 Mn)
PhonePe 
(Corporate Round, Dec. 2019 – $82 Mn)
TOP 8 FUNDING DEALS
ACTIVE INVESTORS
[Not An Exhaustive List]
4.55
165.5
330.2
868.8
484.3
180.8 105.3
1,818.0
1,452.5
7
97
48
26
18
8
3
3
53
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Angel
Seed
Series A Series B Series C Series D Series E Series G
Others
Total Funding
Total No of Deals
26
53
18
3

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Government & Regulator Initiatives
8
A Sneak Peek
Central Government – Generates Necessary Tailwinds: Since the beginning of 2019, there has been a concerted effort by
the central government through appropriate policies to leverage innovation to bring about visible societal-level changes. While
some of these policies have been heavily debated in the context of already-operational FinTech business models, some have a
far-reaching impact on fundamental issues such as data. Abolishing MDR on UPI and RuPay payments was one such heavily
debated policy measure. Even as some of the existing revenue models in payments have come under extreme stress due to this
mandate, it is expected to push the agenda of digital payments adoption much further.
The Reserve Bank of India mandated all payment service providers to localize data within the country with no option to mirror
the data outside of the country. Considering the significance of data, security, and access in an exponentially growing digital
payments landscape and the fact that the majority of big players are foreign enterprises, this might have been an important
move. However, the cost of this mandate to these enterprises is still being argued upon. The Personal Data Protection Bill was
taken to the parliament in early 2020 but was delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Clarity on the localization of data and the
nuances of data protection, sharing, and portability are heavily dependent on the safe passage of this bill.
The Supreme Court of India ruled against the RBI, lifting the ban on cryptocurrency trading.
Regulators – Initial Traction, Long Way to Go: The RBI has been proactive in examining and setting up regulatory
frameworks across various FinTech verticals such as digital payments, P2P lending, and more. In January 2020, the RBI gave
its nod to video-based KYC as an alternative to physical verification. The video-KYC process allows due diligence of the
customer and identifying documents via video chat. Additionally, the RBI also authorized the use of digital lockers for paperless
document management as part of the KYC process. These steps will particularly help banks, NBFCs, prepaid wallet players,
and Neobanks, all of whom have been pushing the edge of fully digitized onboarding for a while. Additionally, this should
augment financial inclusion, with the cost of onboarding reducing significantly.
While SEBI and IRDA have constituted committees to study the growing impact of FinTechs in the WealthTech & InsurTech in
India, the advances for proactive regulatory policies that will facilitate disruptive innovations have been relatively slow. However,
the initiative for setting up regulatory sandboxes where startups can develop and experiment with innovative products in a
controlled environment is a step in the right direction. The IRDA sandbox received over 150 applications.
In June 2020, the SEBI clarified that corporate Registered Investment Advisors could also distribute mutual funds. This should
encourage several budding robo-advisors in India to re-strategize on their business models.
State Governments – Up the Ante!: State governments in at least eight states have taken steps to create favorable policies to
foster FinTech startups or establish FinTech hubs. With its own FinTech policy, Maharashtra continues to lead the way for other
states with their vision. Here’s a time-lapse of Maharashtra’s initiatives:
FEBRUARY 2018: LAUNCH OF POLICY
Maharashtra becomes the first Indian state to launch its 
own FinTech policy.
JUNE 2018: MUMBAI FINTECH FESTIVAL
Launches a FinTech registry for identification and 
information collection on the FinTech ecosystem. 
Furthermore, it launches an API sandbox to facilitate the 
creation of new products in a secure environment.
NOVEMBER 2018: SINGAPORE FINTECH FESTIVAL
Eight shortlisted startups from the MFH Registry were 
invited to showcase their solution at the festival. 
DECEMBER 2018: ACCELERATOR 1.0
Launches the inaugural version of its accelerator program 
in which 13 startups were selected from over 200+ 
applications. 
MARCH 2019: FINTEGRATE ZONE 2019
Launches the Uday FinTech Education Platform and 
distribution of the second set of grants by Governor of 
Maharashtra.
MAY 2019: FINTECH EDUCATION PLATFORM
Launches the FinTech Education Platform (FEP) that 
hosts e-learning modules for technical, functional, and 
miscellaneous skill sets.
JUNE 2019: FINTECH INVESTMENTS & DEALS
FInD platform was launched for matchmaking 
between startups and investors.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
IndiaStack is the most ambitious societal initiative globally, aimed at putting up a public digital infrastructure based
on open APIs in order to promote public and private digital initiatives. IndiaStack has played a catalytic role in India’s
digital foundation and evolution.
It is founded on the core principles that services can be:
1.
Presenceless 
or capable of being authenticated from anywhere
2.
Paperless
or reliant on digital records
3.
Cashless
or truly universalizing the access and usage of digital payments
4.
Consent-based
or allowing secure movement of data authenticated by its owners
Aadhaar and UPI have been the most prominent components of the stack over the years. A number of incremental
developments were introduced on various parts of the stack during the last 18 months ending June 2020. UPI was
upgraded with new services such as eMandates and recurring payments to make collections easy for financial
institutions and subscription-based businesses. On the back of RuPay going international, UPI is also being piloted
for international launches in the UAE and Singapore. The ambiguity that prevailed on Aadhaar usage for onboarding
has now been cleared with regulated financial entities allowed to use eKYC and unregulated entities allowed to use
offline XML-based KYC. Account Aggregation, overseen by the RBI, is expected to go fully operational in the latter
half of 2020 with seven account aggregators and several large banks and NBFCs launching consent-based data
sharing. DigiLocker came out of the shadows and saw massive adoption in the last 12 months.
Based on the success of IndiaStack, over 20 countries have shown interest in studying and implementing a digital
identity system inspired by Aadhaar and the software stack built around it. In 2018, Singapore and India had signed
a high-level agreement to “internationalize” the IndiaStack. The agreement has been followed up with the creation of
an India-Singapore Joint Working Group on FinTech to develop API-based platforms for the ASEAN region. A
number of countries and international agencies such as the World Bank and the Gates Foundation have also
approached India with requests to help build digital identity and payment architectures in other markets.
IndiaStack — Gateway to Opportunities
9
KEY METRICS FOR A SELECTED SUBSET OF THE SYSTEMS
LAYER
PROVIDER
APIs/
FUNCTIONALITY
VOLUME/IMPACT
Presenceless
UIDAI
Authentication
1.25 Bn Enrolled
43.56 Bn Authenticated to Date 
1.18 Bn in June 2020
Paperless
UIDAI
KYC
8.26 Bn eKYC to Date
104.53 Mn in June 2020
MeitY/DigiLocker
Documents
3.79 Bn Issued Authentic Documents
Cashless
NPCI/UPI
Payments
1336.93 Mn Transactions in June 2020
AEPS, Aadhaar Pay
Payments
397.39 Mn Transactions in June 2020
Source: Websites of various providers.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
India has chosen to have a very different approach to open banking. Unlike many other geographies where instant payment
initiatives are running parallel to open data initiatives, India flipped the equation by implicitly launching open banking with
payments first on what is now widely considered the best real-time payment network in the world—UPI. Having tasted success
on a large scale with UPI, India is now on the cusp of going live with the Account Aggregation framework, which will be its first
foray into consent-based financial data sharing. Account Aggregators are trusted intermediaries that are empowered to broker
consumers’ financial data between data providers and data users. Data providers and users are accredited enterprises. They
currently fall under the ambit of one of the four Indian financial services regulators—RBI, SEBI, PFRDA, and IRDA. The
exchange of data happens strictly based on consumer consent. India is now on the cusp of going live with the Account
Aggregation framework, which will be its first foray into consent-based financial data sharing.
Account Aggregation is envisioned to usher in a new kind of digital data model wherein Account Aggregators (regulated by the
special NBFC-AA license) will act as data access fiduciaries between users/entities who are the primary owners of data, and
banks, FIs, and NBFCs that maintain & manage it. In this case, users/entities will be classified as financial data owners, and
banks, MFCs, insurance service providers, tax/GST platforms will be financial information providers (FIPs). Standardized API
specifications are made available by ReBIT to make AA a very interoperable and technology agnostic framework. Specifications
are purpose-built for and made available to aggregators, information providers, and information users.
As of June 2020, three operating and four in-principle NBFC-AA licenses have been issued by the RBI. A host of banks and
NBFCs are in various pilot stages with the initiative. These include large FIs such as SBI, ICICI Bank, HDFC Bank, and Bajaj
Finserv.
The application of account aggregation spans a broad set of use cases, such as personal finance, wealth advisory, credit
decisioning, access to credit, and access to insurance. Some of the concrete use cases have been illustrated below:
India’s Account Aggregation Framework
10
FLOW-BASED CREDIT
Account Aggregation will help individuals and small businesses use consented data-sharing to increase access to
cheaper credit.
AGGREGATED FINANCIAL
POSITION & CASH FLOW
FIU receives 
consent to 
read and 
access digital 
transactions, 
assets and 
liabilities
Transactional data 
is combined with 
data from other 
sources such as 
GSTN, credit 
bureau to 
underwrite and 
assess borrowing 
power
Loans and credit 
lines are granted 
based on insights 
out of cash flows 
and other 
attributes as 
opposed to 
based on assets
1
2
3
Pull 
transactions/
cash flow 
data from 
banks.
Use this 
data to
underwrite.
Consume data 
directly from the 
source at a much 
lower cost than
what is currently 
out there.
1
2
3

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
India’s Stack-Powered Digital Ecosystem
11
Put together, the layers, power the IndiaStack and a robust digital ecosystem across applications, and devices as
represented below to solve unique use cases across each of the industries:
The impact of IndiaStack through its different layers
has been huge since its inception. It has acted as a
disruptive force and reinvented the wheel to build new
processes and provide the low-cost digital push India
needed to move from a data-poor to a data-rich
economy, as highlighted in the sections above.
There have been significant benefits such as lower cost
of transactions, lower onboarding costs for businesses,
providing a broad-based, ubiquitous platform and
personalized
offerings
at
scale,
allowing
new
businesses,
developers,
enterprises,
and
the
government to build their digital footprints in the
country. IndiaStack enables businesses to tap into
customer segments that were previously out of reach.
In the future, a range of different digitally verifiable
identity systems will continue to evolve in line with the
Supreme Court of India’s ruling with regulatory policy
changes
underway
and
further
technology
developments
that
enable
identification
through
alternative
means,
such
as
QR
codes,
voice-
recognition, and beyond.
As parts of the IndiaStack have progressively evolved
over the last five years, its promised benefits are
starting to deliver. The growth of the digital payments
ecosystem around UPI and DigiLocker becoming
mainstream are testimony to this fact. Aadhaar based
due diligence and DigiLocker have reduced user
onboarding
costs
and
increased
inclusion.
With
Account Aggregation soon going operational, India
would have completed the rollout of what is arguably
the most unique societal platform deployed anywhere
in the world.
www.goMEDICI.com
INDIA’S STACK-POWERED DIGITAL ECOSYSTEM

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
INDIA FINTECH REPORT 2020
12
SEGMENT-WISE
OVERVIEW

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Neobanking
13
Over the last decade, the Indian FinTech ecosystem has witnessed a plethora of innovations. The first wave of disruption in
financial services was led by digital payment startups, followed by digital lending, wealth management, and InsurTech startups.
However, the second wave, or as we like to call it “FinTech 2.0,” is led by Neobanks that aim to redefine customer-centric
consumer and business banking experiences. Problem statements being addressed include fully digitized account opening,
free debit cards, instant payments, personal finance advisory, cash flow analysis & projections, GST-compliant invoicing, and
accounting integration. As of publishing this report, there are about 15 neobanks in India, several of them under development
or in beta stages.
Digital-Only Banking Models
Global digital-only banking landscape consists of non-licensed over-the-top banks (also called Neobanks), digital-only brands
of incumbent banks, and licensed challenger digital banks.
Licensed Digital Challengers
These are digital-only banks which
have obtained a fully operational
banking license. This model enables
them to offer products & services,
raise capital, and lend on their own.
Lower operating costs help them
offer
better
interest
rates
to
customers.
Partnerships
with
FinTechs and even other banks are
common in this model, and some
offer
marketplaces.
The
Reserve
Bank of India does not offer such a
differentiated license.
Over The Top Neobanks
These are stand-alone digital platforms that do
not have their own banking licenses. They offer
either niche products or a bouquet of products
in partnerships with FIs, banks, and FinTech
firms but at a cost quite lower than that of
traditional banks. Highly tech-driven and an
overlay over licensed banks, they differentiate
themselves by offering unique features/VAS
and better banking experiences. In the absence
of differentiated digital banking licenses, this is
currently the most sought-after model in India.
Digital-Only Brands of Banks
These are stand-alone, digital-
only brands created by traditional
incumbent banks. Technology-led
and operationally separate from
their parents; they mostly target
the
younger
segment.
Being
greenfield initiatives, they tend not
to carry the legacy technology
baggage
from
their
parent
entities.
This
has
been
a
reasonably successful model in
India since 2016.
With FinTech segments like payments and digital lending getting overcrowded, investors' interest has shifted towards India’s
Neobanking. The total funding raised by Indian Neobanks so far totals $139.8 Mn. This does not include $93 million raised by
Razorpay since 2019, a part of which will fund their newly launched Neobanking initiative. In their efforts to become a part of the
next wave of FinTech innovation, venture capital & private equity investors have started to invest heavily in Neobanking startups.
Startup 
Total Funding
Latest Funding Stage
$49.2 Mn
Series B
$37.4 Mn
Series B
$26 Mn
Seed
$13.2 Mn
Seed
$7.8 Mn
Series A
$4.7 Mn
Seed
$1.5 Mn
Seed
Undisclosed
Seed
Investors have started to 
recognize the enormous 
potential of the Indian 
Neobanking segment. This 
has attracted prominent 
global investors like 
Tencent Holdings, Sequoia 
Capital, and domestic 
investment institutions like 
Omidyar Network and 
Matrix Partners.
INVESTORS & NUMBER OF NEOBANKING DEALS
Sequoia Capital
(4)
Matrix
(3)
Omidyar Network
(2)
Tiger Global Management
(2)
Flourish VC
(2)
Better Capital
(2)
3one4 Capital
(2)

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Digital Lending
14
Digital lending FinTechs are targeting the unmet demand from Indian MSMEs as well as consumers for credit. Many banks in
India have so far focused on highly creditworthy segments primarily due to a lack of credit history of others. The traditional ways
of banking approve only ~25 to 40% of the loan applications. However, with access to more data for credit scoring such as
transaction, behavior, app-based data, location information, social data, and more, these new lending models aim to increase
this threshold by an additional 10–15%, which is a huge market opportunity. From a small segment a few years ago, India now
has over 338 lending startups. The acquisition of Mumbai-based consumer lending platform PaySense by digital payments
provide PayU at a valuation of $185 million, further brought the spotlight to the potential of digital lending in India. Several new
models of digital lending have emerged, such as DMI Finance offering FinTech startups API access to sandboxes, thus helping
them develop bespoke financial products and Apollo Finvest positioning themselves as ‘AWS for Lending’ by enabling partners
to offer digital loan products to their end-customers through APIs. In consumer credit, the urban population is likely to leverage
FinTech lending services to avoid heavy documentation. The rural population (which is new to credit) can benefit from
alternative credit scoring mechanisms to avoid loan sharks. This would provide access to a market with over 300 million
unbanked households. Hence, the use of identity, authentication, credit score, job eligibility, and social data to generate ratings
for various use cases is likely to draw more attention in the near term.
New-Age Lending: The Power of IndiaStack
The maturing IndiaStack and growing API-based data availability have
fundamentally transformed every step of the credit value chain. Near end-to-
end digital lending has become a reality, with loan approval turnaround times
as short as one day. Over 338 lending (consumer and SMEs) startups in India
are leveraging on Aadhaar authentication, eKYC, and UPI platforms to offer
quick background checks, credit scores, and instant loans to the urban, rural,
and underserved populations.
Flow-Based Credit System Powered By Account Aggregator Framework:
In a well-implemented account aggregation scenario, a small borrower should be able to provide consent to a lender through
an account aggregator to access various categories of financial data held at multiple custodians (banks, wallet providers,
Aadhaar database, DigiLocker, mobile data). In the transaction flow above, the borrower requests the lender for a microcredit
line. To assess this facility’s viability, the lender requests for the borrower’s data held at various other custodians (FIs, mobile
carriers, wallet providers) to be passed on to them via a data access fiduciary (account aggregators in the case of financial
services). With the borrower’s consent, the fiduciary requests and fetches data from one or more custodians and passes on the
acquired and aggregated data to the lender. The lender may then combine this data with various other data sources such as
public data, economic data, and other such sources to apply state-of-the-art credit decisioning models and forecast the
likelihood of default with much better accuracy and confidence. Real-time access to data at will based on consent also dispels
the need to have collateral security to grant microloans.
UNDERWRITING 
APPROACHES
Consumer Credit ($300-Bn Gap)
•
Demographic Data Personal Finance 
Bureau Management Models Social Data
•
App-based Data Access Location 
Information Machine Learning
SME Financing ($200-Bn Gap)
•
CIBIL Score Transaction Behavior Collateral
•
Non-Traditional Data Sources Audited Financial
•
Surrogate Data Statements
•
Leverage AI/ML/Data Analytics
Future Model: Cash Flow Based 
Lending based on Account 
Aggregation
Digital Lending 
Funding: Breakdown 
of $1,673 Million
Top Funded Digital 
Lending Startups in 
India 
(> USD 100 Million)
Borrower
Data 
Custodians 
Providers
Banks
Wallets | Carriers
Lender/
Data User
Models
Aggregated 
Data Set
Consent
Managers
Account
Aggregator
Telco
Aggregator
1
2
3
4
Digital 
Consumer 
Finance
SME Financing
53.32%
22.33%
0.06%
24.27%
Digital 
Consumer 
Finance
SME 
Financing
P2P 
Lending
Others

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
WealthTech
15
India has witnessed a phenomenal increase in the wealthy
population in the last few years. Against this backdrop, India
has witnessed many advancements in the wealth management
industry. We have been witnessing the democratization of
investment advisory services, where wealth managers are
leveraging technology to offer low-cost investment advisory to
mass segments.
Robo-Advisors in India: Robo-advisory in India is rapidly
evolving. We are seeing startups going beyond Mutual Fund
distribution to offering digitized, long-term financial planning.
They are using algorithms and artificial intelligence to
understand the goals and aspirations of users better and
provide them with personalized advice rather than just offering
a generic portfolio. As more and more millennials pick up stock
market investing and other investment avenues, financial
literacy is also improving, leading to a mature outlook towards
aspects such as financial life goals and retirement planning.
The services of these platforms range from automated plans,
goal-based asset allocation, and end-to-end advisory based on
information taken from the client. Today, not only startups but
also established financial advisory services, such as Birla, Bajaj
Capital, ICICI Securities, and Sanctum Wealth Management,
are
optimistic
about
the
future
of
robo-advisory.
The
competition in robo-advisory is resulting in the expansion of the
WealthTech market.
Thematic Investment: Investment platforms are facilitating
thematic investing. Each theme consists of a diversified
portfolio of stocks based on an idea. An investor can focus on
his ideas instead of individual stocks. E.g., smallcase, Fyers,
Karvy
Discount Broking Models: Discount brokers are those
houses that charge clients significantly lower fees than
traditional ones and offer only online trading facilities, but no
research supports or financial advice. Globally, because of the
low-cost structure, discount brokers are quite popular among
traders, but not among investors. E.g., Zerodha, 5Paisa, Upstox,
Samco
E-Commerce Firms & Digital Wallets Offering Investment
Products: Due to regulatory changes brought in by SEBI’s e-
commerce companies and digital wallets are now offering
mutual funds through their apps. E.g., PhonePe (financial arm
of Flipkart) and Paytm.
Hybrid Models of Investment Advisory: To get the best of
both worlds, established financial advisors offer a hybrid model
to the clients. The insights and experience of the traditional
financial planners are combined with the agility, accessibility,
and advanced technology of the robo-advisors. Financial
planning companies outsource the repetitive and mechanical
tasks to robo-advisors while the more intricate tasks of
providing personalized advice and risk management advice
based on insights and direct interaction with the client are
being taken care of by the traditional financial advisors.
UPI to Act as Key Enabler for WealthTech Startups: It will
help them expand their digital footprint by digitizing mutual
fund products. However, there is a limit that has been set by
NPCI that restricts users to buy units worth than Rs. 1 lakh via
UPI. Users can also apply and pay for IPO allotments through
their preferred UPI app. UPI is already being leveraged by
players, such as IDFC, LIC Mutual Fund, Aditya Birla Sun Life,
Reliance Nippon Life AMC, Motilal Oswal, Quantum, and
Baroda Pioneer AMC, for enabling online investments.
Goal-Based
Investing
in
Mutual
Funds:
Funds
are
recommended based on customer’s age, life stage, risk
appetite, and market conditions. Once a customer invests in a
goal, the portfolio is monitored continuously, and suggestions
are made when changes are required. E.g., Upwardly
WealthTech Startups: Leveraging IndiaStack
IndiaStack has enabled Wealth Management processes
with over 440 startups (personal finance management,
robo-advisory, marketplaces, investment brokerage) that
leverage it and build various innovative solutions. Startups
leverage Aadhaar authentication, eKYC, and UPI for
transactions and fees, and eSign for document signatures.
WealthTech Funding: 
Breakdown of $213 
Million
Top Funded 
WealthTech 
Startups in India 
(> USD 50 Million)
Top Retail Brokers in India 
by No. of Active Clients –
2020 (Value in Lakhs)
52.32%
28.57%
19.10%
Investment
Platforms
Personal
Finance
Management
Others
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
Zerodha
ICICI
RKSV (Upstox)
Angel
HDFC
Kotak
5paisa
Sharekhan
Motilal Oswal
Axis Securities
Mar-19
Mar-20
Jun-20
Zerodha, India’s largest stock 
broker, is a bootstrapped 
startup that has turned 
profitable and is valued at 
around $1 billion.
Note: There is a growing trend of unbundling and companies expanding into multiple segments. This representation is therefore directional in nature as companies might be 
present in more than 1 subsegment or even segments. Reach out to us if you want to change the segment classification of your company or want to discuss the rationale.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
InsurTech
16
InsurTech landscape is quite nascent in India. The current
insurance penetration is quite low, i.e., 2.76% in life insurance
and 0.93% in non-life insurance compared to the global
average of 6.5%. ‘Lack of customer trust’ remains the key
challenge facing the InsurTech segment, and so far, industry
players have found it as a hard nut to crack. The current
InsurTech space in India is being dominated by few new-age
insurers like Toffee, Digit, and Acko with their ability to attract
and popularity among millennials.
Preventive Insurance Models: Armed with the capabilities of
AI/ML, predictive analytics, and data captured by IoT-driven
connected devices, InsurTech players are exploring ways to
make the most out of deep data insights and drive the
transition from a reactive approach to proactive prevention.
Preventive insurance is gaining traction across the entire
insurance
value
chain
from
health
insurance
to
home/equipment/transit/automotive insurance. E.g., Kruzr,
Niramai, Carnot Technologies
Neo-Insurance Carriers in India Leveraging the Concept of
Embedded Insurance: New-age digital insurers have started
to adopt the practice of offering insurance policies to
customers during their purchase of a product or services. This
POS insurance model enables digital insurance to access the
large consumer base of online service providers and e-
commerce aggregators.
Digital Insurance Advisors: These are the aggregator
platform that enables customers to compare and buy insurance
products of both new-age online insurers and traditional
insurance companies. There has been a significant uptick in the
number of aggregators since 2013 when a regulation was
passed on web aggregators.
Sachet Insurance: Small-Ticket Insurance, popularly known
as ‘sachet insurance,’ is being adopted on a wide scale among
the Indian population. These insurance
schemes are priced at lesser than Rs. 10, making it affordable
for the users to get covered under insurance worth lakhs of
rupees. These bite-sized insurance policies are being offered
by
startups
(e.g.,
Toffee
Insurance),
IRCTC,
insurance
companies, and Pradhan Mantri Bima Yojana.
Emerging Business Models: The newer business models,
such as microinsurance on-demand, are changing the nature
of the insurance industry by moving from complex long-term
insurance products to short-term insurance products based on
time, usage, and activity. The focus on niche segments is
driving this trend. E.g., Toffee Insurance.
Underwriting
&
Risk
Management:
Using
advanced
technologies like Big Data, AI insurance companies can
leverage a data-driven, risk-scoring model, thereby enabling
help them to make better risk coverage decisions across all
lines of businesses such as life & health, retirement planning,
commercial, and investment. E.g., i3 Systems, Health Vector.
Conversational UI: The digital engagement via chatbots is
gaining industry momentum. Chatbots bring better customer
experience allowing insurance firms to deploy distribution,
claims, and customer service. Chatbots help in functions like
general customer service questions, personalized product
recommendation, general questions from agents/brokers,
direct-to-consumer (D2C) sales, claims, and more. E.g., Ask
Arvi
Insurance Infrastructure APIs: Innovative and fast-growing
infrastructure APIs solution provider InsurTechs are poised to
create a space of ‘insurance as a service’ companies in India.
These
infrastructure
API
players
can
support
product
innovation and distribution via digital channels for insurance
companies and platform economy players. E.g., Riskcovry
Developments in the InsurTech 
Space in India
InsurTech Funding: 
Breakdown of $445 
Million
Top Funded 
InsurTech 
Startups in India 
(> USD 50 Million)
• Connected ecosystems can help insurers 
better understand risk profiles and spot issues 
quickly. E.g., Kruzz
• Artificial Intelligence and ML are leveraging AI 
for functions like claim automation, fraud 
prevention, underwriting & risk management, 
and insurance chatbots. E.g., Artivatic.ai
• Wearables can provide near-real-time data to 
the insurers, helping them better manage risks. 
E.g., GOQii
• Blockchain offers features such as efficient 
information exchange, trust, and smart 
contracts. E.g., Sofocle Technologies.
• Robo-advisors rely on rules and machine 
learning to handle customer interactions and 
even sell. E.g., Ask Arvi
• Advanced analytics helps insurers in analyzing 
data and making better decisions. E.g., 
Pentation Analytics.
48.50%
41.50%
9.60%
0.30%
Aggregators/
Policy 
Management
Online First 
Insurance
IOT (Preventive  
Insurance/
Telematics)
Software/
White Label APIs
Note: There is a growing trend of unbundling and companies expanding into multiple segments. This representation is therefore directional in nature as companies might be 
present in more than 1 subsegment or even segments. Reach out to us if you want to change the segment classification of your company or want to discuss the rationale.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Digital Payments
17
RBI’s Newest Proposal: A Gamechanger for India’s Retail Payments Sector
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has proposed setting up of a new pan-India umbrella entity (NUE) for retail payment systems,
which will be responsible for setting up, managing, and operating new payment systems, especially in the retail space,
including ATMs, white label PoS, Aadhaar-based payments, and remittance services. The RBI has floated a framework for
establishing the new entity and has invited comments on the draft framework by February 25, 2020. The new entity will also
have to develop new payment methods, standards and technologies, and monitor related issues in India as well as abroad. The
central bank said it would have to operate clearing and settlement systems and manage risks such as settlement credit. The
proposed entity can either be a for-profit company or a non-profit organization, the RBI said.
Growth in No. of POS Terminals 
in India
Digital Payments 
Funding: Breakdown 
of $2,467 Million
Top Funded Digital 
Payments Startups 
in India 
(> USD 80 Million)
Digital payments has been the flag bearer of the Indian FinTech space. In recent years, we have witnessed a plethora of exciting
innovations like UPI, biometric payments, e-wallets initiations by banks, BharatQR code, and sound-wave-based payment
technologies. One of the primary reasons can be attributed to the forward-thinking of central & state governments and Reserve Bank
of India for successfully bringing a digital payment revolution in India.
Government-led Initiatives: The Indian payments landscape has been revolutionized by the regulators and the central bank’s
proactive initiatives, e.g., IndiaStack and UPI. India has emerged as one of the most exciting markets for digital payments across the
world. Last year, home-grown payment networks (RuPay and UPI) took the lion’s share of the total digital transactions, i.e., 65%,
showcasing how their efforts have been in the right direction for achieving targets.
The success of UPI: Could it be a model for the world? Recently, tech giant Google wrote to the US Federal Reserve, praising the
UPI model that has taken the digital payment space in India by storm and recommended creating similar open-payment architecture
in the US. Furthermore, With UPI going global, it sets up the stage for the FinTech players as they have already started receiving
queries from international financial institutions, banks, and governments. This has further opened immense opportunities for FinTech
players who can share their technology with foreign countries like China, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, and other SEA
countries.
P2P PAYMENT FLOW USING UPI
There are two sides to digital payments: a consumer-facing
side, which comprises mobile wallet (Paytm, PhonePe, etc.),
credit card, debit cards, and new form factors (such as OEM-
native payment apps, and wearables); and a merchant side,
which is developing at a really slow pace. It is not a question of
whether digital payments will alter merchants’ fortunes in the
future—that is a given (based on empirical data). The question
is: how soon? India has been trying to shift from cash-
dependent society to a cashless society for quite some time
now. The biggest hurdle lies in the adoption of digital
payments infrastructure on the merchant side. However,
initiatives like UPI 2.0, MDR cuts by the RBI, and Near Field
Technology schemes have been silently but swiftly changing
the merchant payments landscape in India.
Sender
UI (Mobile Device)
Sender
Sender’s Bank
(or PSP)
5.08 Mn
Apr. 2020
1.5 Mn
Oct. 2016
3.4x
Growth in 
the last 3.5 
years
Pre-
Demonetization
Post-
Demonetization
Sender’s Global
Identifiers
1. Mobile#
2. Aadhaar#
3. Biometrics
4. Bank Account #
Receiver’s Global
Identifiers
1. Mobile#
2. Aadhaar#
3. Biometrics
4. Bank Account #
NPCI Data 
Depository
Sender’s 
VPA @
Receiver’s 
VPA @
Existing Payment Rails
UI (Mobile Device)
Sender’s Bank
(or PSP)
78.68%
8.63%
0.17%
12.10%
0.41%
Mobile/Digital 
Wallets
Payment
Gateway
Proximity
Payments
SME/Merchant 
Payment
Software/
White 
Label APIs

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Emerging Themes at the Intersection of 
FinTech
18
Beyond the core segments of the Financial Services industry, Agriculture, Healthcare, and Real Estate are witnessing new
business models based on digital platforms, developments in data collection, storage & processing for real-time insights, and
simplification of information & monetary transactions. AgriTech, HealthTech, and PropTech startups are disrupting traditional
ways of doing business in three industries that facilitate the nation’s most vital necessities—food, healthcare, and shelter for
citizens. These startups not only can improve efficiencies in production and availability but also ease the process of trade and
movement of money for market players. As a result, financial services players can benefit in these organized markets that can
provide alternative data to improve the payments, lending, and (or) insurance underwriting practices to become customer-
centric services.
AgriTech is an enabler to agriculture
data creation, deep analysis using
advanced algorithms, as well as end
usage
by
players
across
the
agriculture value chain. With new
technologies
that
focus
on
data
collection
and
analysis,
these
innovators
are
becoming
valuable
assets for data deprived financial
services industry.
HealthTech
is
solving
problems
around
unstructured,
fragmented,
and inaccessible data, as well as
creating real-time health data that
can be vital to many industry players
such
as
insurers
and
healthcare
providers.
PropTech is powered by new-age
technologies and data sources that
can eliminate prevailing challenges of
data asymmetry through real-time
inputs,
advanced
analytics,
and
simpler
user
interfaces
for
transactions,
financing,
and
documentation.
AgriTech
HealthTech
PropTech
Leverage data to 
improve payments, 
lending, and insurance 
underwriting + focus on 
customer-centric 
services
Bridging the 
data gap with
alternative data

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
19
CONVERTING THE UNBANKED POPULATION
Financial inclusion in India has seen a significant flip in recent years due to the government’s JAM (Jan Dhan-Aadhaar-
Mobile) initiative. With the launch of the Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana, India’s banked population more than doubled
from 2011 to 80% by 2017, and by 2018, 66% of about 536 million no-frills accounts were Jan Dhan accounts.
USAGE OF BANKING SERVICES
Though a large number of bank accounts were opened, the usage of these accounts has not been encouraging. A World
Bank study states that only 7% of the Indian population borrowed from an established, licensed financial institution. This
rate has not changed much in the last five years despite the increase in formal banking services. Low financial literacy
levels meant that many people remain unaware of the potential benefits they could reap from their new Jan Dhan
accounts.
RISE OF THE CONNECTED POPULACE
According to a study by IAMAI-Nielsen, in 2019, the number of rural internet users at 277 million outnumbered urban
areas at 227 million by 10%. The digital divide that existed earlier has now been bridged. India also has the lowest cost of
mobile data compared to any country in the world. The number of smartphone users in the country crossed 500 million
last year, with 4G penetration extending to more than 88% of the country. With increased smartphone adoption and
inexpensive internet usage, the stage has been set to cover the last mile of financial inclusion. India’s financial services
industry can take a leaf out of the FMCG sector and its innovative methods in serving the rural population, which has led
to 45% of its revenues being generated from this populace. Along with banks and NBFCs, the Indian startup ecosystem
also has a crucial role in achieving this goal of last-mile connectivity.
DIGITAL TRANSACTIONS ARE PAVING THE WAY FORWARD
India has been at the forefront of digital transactions during the last few years. The rise in internet usage and
smartphone penetration has played a critical role in this regard as well. Aadhaar-Enabled Payments Channel (AEPS), a
Micro ATM system, has clocked an annual growth rate of 150% since 2016, thereby emerging as one of the fastest-
growing payment systems in the country, second only to the UPI system. A study of the RBI’s data on ATM deployment
by banks shows that only 19% of ATMs were deployed in rural areas. In such a situation, these Micro ATMs can play a
crucial role in enabling this population to access funds for their basic needs. With increased focus by the government on
Direct Benefit Transfers for transferring the government schemes to its citizens, such access infrastructure will go a long
way in fulfilling the government’s financial inclusion mandate.
ACCESS TO CREDIT IS A MAJOR STUMBLING BLOCK
Credit is the driving engine of an economy, and financial inclusion cannot be achieved without providing access to
inexpensive and easy modes of credit to the deserving. As discussed earlier, credit through traditional banking channels
has been difficult to access for the general populace in India. It is not just individuals, but also MSMEs that are struggling
to access credit. The MSME sector continues to struggle in particular, with only 10% of small businesses having access
to formal credit. With the rise in internet usage and smartphone penetration, financial services firms are looking at digital
lending models driven by cutting-edge technologies such as artificial intelligence and machine learning to bridge this
gap. Digital lending has some inherent advantages over traditional lending, such as speedier approval of credit, use of
alternate data to assess creditworthiness, and operating cost efficacy. Some of the popular digital lending models that
are working towards financial inclusion include mobile lending, supply chain financing, crowdfunding, PoS lending, and
invoice financing.
FINTECH PLAYERS
FinTech players have embraced the challenge of working towards financial inclusion and are facilitating the rapid
adoption of ﬁnancial services such as P2P mobile payments, alternative lending to small businesses & consumers, and
more. Quite a few startups have emerged in this space, such as Jai Kisan, which empowers farmers through agri-credit;
GramCover, which offers insurance for rural India; Kaarva, a credit line for regular income workers; Lakshya, which is
working on improving the financial health of the urban underserved, and more. These, along with the traditional players,
such as Paytm, PhonePe, and Lendingkart, will play a crucial role in ensuring that financial services reach every citizen of
the country.
Source: NPCI
Financial Inclusion via FinTech

About MEDICI
MEDICI is the world’s leading FinTech Research and Innovation Platform. MEDICI is a partner to banks, tech companies and FIs 
globally with over 13,000 FinTechs on the platform, enabling FinTechs to scale and create global economic impact. MEDICI is 
committed to supporting the complex financial services ecosystem and enabling stakeholders benefit from the industry’s 
accelerated growth and global impact.
Aditya Khurjekar
CEO & Founder
ak@goMEDICI.com
Amit Goel
CSIO & Founder
amit@goMEDICI.com
Get your copy of the 
full report!
DOWNLOAD
About Internet and Mobile Association of India (IAMAI)
IAMAI  is a young and vibrant association with ambitions of representing the entire gamut of digital businesses in India. It was
established in 2004 by the leading online publishers, and in the last 16 years has come to effectively address the challenges facing 
the digital and online industry including mobile content and services, online publishing, mobile advertising, online advertising, 
ecommerce and mobile & digital payments among others. Sixteen years after its establishment, the association is still the only 
professional industry body representing the online industry in India. The association is registered under the Societies Act and is a 
recognized charity in Maharashtra. With a membership of nearly 300 Indian and overseas companies, and with offices in Delhi, 
Mumbai, and Bengaluru, the association is well placed to work towards charting a growth path for the digital industry in India.
About Fintech Convergence Council (FCC)
FCC is formed under Internet and Mobile Association of India (IAMAI) and represents the FinTech industry and traditional 
companies in the BFSI space. The purpose of the council is to encourage collaboration, seek complementarities and build synergy 
between leading BFSI companies and the emerging FinTech start-ups. The council has worked towards interpreting the regulatory 
and legal framework, aggregating the concerns and feedback of the various players within the larger FinTech community, 
communicating it to regulators and lawmakers, and organizing events and gatherings for the industry participants to meet, share 
ideas and work together in the interest of creating a safer, more open and more collaborative operating environment through a
transparent forum.
Gaurav Chopra
Vice President
gaurav@iamai.in
Neha Bajaj
Asst. Vice President
neha@iamai.in
gomedici.com/ifr2020
