CHAPTER 13 
 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
13.1 India as Knowledge Power : In less than two decades, advances in information 
technologies have revolutionized government, scientific, educational, and commercial 
infrastructures. Powerful personal computers, high-bandwidth and wireless networking 
technologies, and the widespread use of the Internet have transformed stand-alone 
systems and predominantly closed networks into a virtually seamless fabric of 
interconnectivity. During this period, Indian IT industry has also built up an enormous 
confidence for itself in the global markets. The IT and IT enabled services (ITeS) sector 
are giving India the image of a young and resilient global knowledge power. The IT-ITeS 
industry has four major sub-components: IT services, business process outsourcing 
(BPO), engineering services and research and development (R&D), and software 
products. 
 
13.2 India is considered as a pioneer in software development and a favorite 
destination for IT-enabled services. The Indian IT-BPO sector including the domestic 
and exports segments continue to grow from strength to strength, witnessing high levels 
of activity both onshore as well as offshore. The companies continue to move up the 
value-chain to offer higher end research and analytics services to their clients. India's 
leadership position in the global IT and BPO industries are based primarily on the 
following advantages. India accounts for around 28 per cent of IT and BPO talent 
among 28 low-cost countries. It has a rapidly growing urban infrastructure fostering 
several IT centres in the country. Offshore service centres are spawning in the country 
due to operational excellence with low delivery cost, quality leadership and a conducive 
business environment. Favorable policy interventions, enabling infrastructure and 
augmenting a wide skill base from the government has further enhanced India’s brand 
image.  
 
13.3 However, there is a real need to measure the digital divide in the country, 
including the urban-rural and gender divides, and the use of community Internet access 
centers by low-income users. 
 
 
India’s progress in ICT related indicators : 
 
13.4 As per Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), India Country Report 2011 
three indicators related to ICT under Goal 8 (Develop a Global Partnership for 
Development), target 18 (In cooperation with the private sector, make available the 
benefits of new technologies, especially information and communication) are being 
monitored in case of India. They are as under : 
   
  Indicator No.       
 
Indicator Description 
47 
Telephone lines and cellular subscribers per 100 population 
48A 
Internet subscribers per 100 population 

48B 
Personal computers  per 100 population 
 
Indicator: Internet subscribers per 100 population 
13.5 Over a period of 12 years, internet subscriber base has increased from 0.21 
million in 1999 to 20.99 million in 2011.  The 20.99 million Internet subscribers at the 
end of Sep-2011 as compared to 19.67 million at the end of March-2011 registered a 
growth of 6.71% within a period of six months.   
 
 
*As on 30th September 2011; for other years, the figures are as on 31st March. 
Source: Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 
 
13.6 Indicator: Personal computers  per 100 population : Use of Personal 
Computers has also increased from 5.4 million PCs in 2001 to 19.6 million in 2006.  
Sale of Personal Computers recorded a growth of 12% in 2010-11 touching 9.7 million.  
The Notebook sales were estimated to be 3.5 million in 2010-11 against 2.5 million in 
2009-10, registering a growth of 40%.  This shows that Notebooks have caught the 
fancy of the consumers. Desktop sales were estimated as 6.2 million in 2010-11 against 
5.5 million in 2009-10 with a growth of 12.7%. 
 
13.7 As per the World Millennium Development Goals Report 2012, the rapidly 
increasing number of internet users in developing countries  has increased the overall 
share of developing countries to 63 % in 2011 vis a vis 44% in 2004.  
 

 
 
 
13.8 The penetration levels in the developing countries have also increased to 26% by 
end of 2011.The penetration level in India, as revealed by Census 2011 ,  however, is 
lower . 
 
13.9 As per Census 2011, about 20 per cent households, out of total of 246,692,667 
households, in urban areas and 5 per cent households in rural areas had 
computers/laptops.  
(Households in percent ) 
Assets  
Total  
Rural  
Urban  
Computer:  
9.5  
5.2  
18.7  
Computer/Laptop - With Internet 
3.1  
0.7  
8.3  
Computer/Laptop - Without Internet 
6.4  
4.5  
10.4  
 
13.10 State wise distribution of the households having computers with internet facility , 
as per Census 2011 , shows that Kerala, Maharashtra, Haryana & Punjab have highest 
penetration with more than 5 percent of households having the facility. On the other 
hand, amongst the major  states, Madhya Pradesh, Chhatisgarh, Jharkhand, Odisha & 
Bihar have lowest penetration with less than 1.5 per cent of households having 
computers with internet facility. 

 
13.11  
Digital Divide : Expansion in internet use and tele –connectivity depends 
on increase in PC penetration and wireless telephony, particularly in rural areas. The 
high rate of growth in the IT and Communication sector is still urban centric and highly 
skewed over States. The problems in the backward States continue to remain in the 
back- burner, while real benefit of connectivity is required the most in these areas. 
Similar digital divide is visible between developed & developing countries as well.  

 
As per World MDG Report 2012, in the 
developing regions, mobile broadband 
penetration stood at 8.5 per cent at the 
close of 2011, compared with 4.8 per cent 
fixed broadband penetration. 
 
Mobile technology and services have 
helped to overcome major infrastructure 
barriers and brought more people online. 
But there is an important broadband 
divide, between regions and between 
developed and developing countries, in 
terms of capacity, quality and speed. While 
in developed economies an increasing 
number of fixed broadband subscriptions 
provide speeds  of above 10 Mbit/s, many 
subscriptions in developing countries are 
slower than 2 Mbit/s. Slow delivery limits 
the type and quality of applications and 
services that can be accessed over the 
Internet. 
 
 Number of Broadband subscribers in India 
increased from 11.89 million at the end of 
March-2011 to 12.83 million at the end of 
Sep-2011, registering a half-yearly growth 
of 7.90% and Y-O-Y growth of 24.44%. 
Apart from this, 373.84 million wireless 
subscribers have subscribed to data 
services, as reported by the wireless 
service providers. 
 
 
Production, Earnings & Exports - IT Sector :  
 
13.12  
As per the estimates of NASSCOM, India’s IT and BPO sector (excluding 
hardware) revenues were US$ 87.6 billion in 2011-12, generating direct employment for 
nearly 2.8 million persons and indirect employment of around 8.9 million. As a 
proportion of national GDP, IT and ITeS sector revenues have grown from 1.2 per cent 
in 1997-8 to an estimated 7.5 per cent in 2011-12. 
 
13.13  
Software exports in 2011-12 are estimated at US$69 billion compared to 
US$59 billion in 201011. While exports continue to dominate the IT-ITeS industry and 
constitute about 78.4 per cent of total Industry revenue, the CAGR of the domestic 
sector has also been high at 12.8 per cent compared to the 14.2 per cent for exports 
during the Eleventh Five Year Plan period. The growth rate of the domestic Sector in 

2010-11 was 20.6 per cent as compared to 18.8 per cent for the export sector; in 2011-
12 it was 9.7 per cent for domestic sector and 16.4 per cent for export sector. In 2012-
13, as per NASSCOM estimates, export revenues are expected to grow by 11-14 per 
cent and domestic revenues by 13-16 per cent. These estimates are a pointer to the 
possibilities of making further forays into the untapped domestic sector for IT and ITeS . 
 
 
 
13.14  
Consistent demand from the US, which increased its share in total exports 
of India's IT and ITeS services from 61.5 per cent to 62 per cent, characterized 2011-12. 
Emerging markets of Asia Pacific and the rest of the world also  contributed to overall 
growth. While the industry’s vertical market mix is well balanced across several mature 
and emerging sectors, there was broad-based demand not only across traditional 
segments such as banking, financial services, and insurance (BFSI), but also new 
emerging verticals of retail, health care, media, and utilities. Sub-sector-wise in 2011-12, 
as per the provisional estimates of NASSCOM, in the export sector, IT services were the 
major component with a 58 per cent share and CAGR of 15.7 per cent for the Eleventh 
Plan period; followed by BPO with a 23.1 per cent share and 12.5 per cent CAGR; and 
software products / engineering with a 18.9 per cent share and 11.8 per cent CAGR. 
Indian IT service offerings have evolved from application development and maintenance 
to emerge as full service players providing testing and infrastructure services, 
consulting, and system integration. The year also witnessed the next phase of BPO-
sector evolution, characterized by greater breadth and depth of services, process re-
engineering across the value chain, increased delivery of analytics and knowledge 
based services through platforms, strong domestic market focus, and Small and 
Medium-sized Business (SMB) centric delivery models. In the engineering design and 
products development segments, there was increasing use of electronics, adoption of 
fuel efficiency norms, convergence of local markets, and use of localized products. 
Increasing confidence between customers and service providers successfully executing 
a variety of activities across low-medium-high complexity projects has led to increasingly 
larger sizes of projects being sourced from India. In the domestic sector, the major 
component is IT services with 64.2 per cent share, followed by software products/ 
engineering with 19.6 per cent share and BPO with 16.2 per cent share. The CAGRs of 
these sectors were 11.5 per cent, 13.6 per cent, and 18.1 per cent respectively. Strong 
economic growth, rapid advancement in technology infrastructure, increasingly 
competitive Indian organizations, enhanced focus by the government and emergence of 
business models that help provide IT to new customer segments are the key drivers for 
increased technology adoption in India. The IT and ITeS sector is also a generator of 

skilled employment with direct employment expected to reach 2.8 million in 201112 
compared to 2.5 million in 2010-11. 
 
13.15  
As per  Annual Report 2011-12 of Department of Electronics & 
Information Technology , Electronics & IT Production (consumer electronics, industrial 
& strategic electronics , electronics components , computer hardware, communication & 
broadcast equipments ) recorded 361% increase in production since 2000-01 whereas 
software production (both for export & domestic use) an increase of 1024 per cent , 
taking the overall increase to about 724 per cent (Rs 68,850 to 5,67,510 Crores). The 
increase in production of Software for domestic use was about 876 % compared to 1073 
per cent increase observed in case of software for export. During the period, the share 
of software for domestic consumption has declined (from 25 to 22 per cent ) in the total 
software production because production  of export related software has increased more 
rapidly.  
 
 
 
Production in 
Rs Crores 
 2000-01 
 2011-12 
Percent 
increase 
Electronics & 
IT (Hardware) 
31,100
143,300
361% 
Software  
37,750
424,210
1024% 
Total 
68,850
567,510
724% 
                  
13.16  
Similarly, Exports of electronics & IT (hardware) recorded an increase 827 
% (Rs 4788- 44400 Crores) during 2000-01 to 2011-12 whereas the growth in total 
export including software was more impressive at 1037 %(Rs 33,138- 3,76,845 Crores) 
because of much better performance in case of software export. 
 

 
 
13.17 Challenges Faced by IT & ITeS Sector : Some of the challenges faced by the IT 
and ITeS sector include increasing competition from other countries with incentivized 
low costs, rising costs in India with wage-push inflation, increasing costs of relevant 
talent and skilled personnel, infrastructure constraints with over 90 per cent of total 
revenue generated from seven Tier-1 locations, risks like currency fluctuations and 
security, both physical and data related, and rising protectionist sentiments in key 
markets.  
 
Government Initiatives:  
National Knowledge Network  
13.18  
The National Knowledge Network is being implemented by 
Department of Information Technology to bring together all the stakeholders in 
Science, Technology, Higher Education, Research & Development and 
Governance. The application areas envisaged under the National Knowledge 
Network cover Agriculture, Education, Health, e-governance, Grid Computing (High 
Performance Computing).  The output of the National Knowledge Network project 
will be a high capacity countrywide Infrastructure at education & research Institute 
level, to support education and research applications, and other application as 
envisaged by these institutions which require very high bandwidth. A high speed 
data communication network would be established, which would interconnect 
Institutions of higher learning.  
 
Capacity Building Scheme 
13.19  
Government of India has approved the National e-Governance Plan 
(NeGP) in pursuance of its policy of introducing e-Governance on a massive scale. 
The NeGP vision is to “Make all Government Services accessible to the common 
man in his locality, through common service delivery outlets and ensure efficiency, 

transparency and reliability of such services at affordable costs to realize the basic 
needs of the common man”.  Capacity Building Scheme for an outlay of Rs 313 
Crores for all the States/UTs for taking National e-Governance Plan (NeGP) 
forward across the country has been approved by the Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs (CCEA) on 10th January 2008. The scheme is mainly for 
providing technical & professional support to State level policy & decision-making 
bodies and to develop specialized skills for e-governance.  
State Wide Area Network (SWAN) 
13.20 Wide Area Network is an advanced telecommunication infrastructure, which 
is used now-a-days extensively, for exchange of data and other types of 
information between two or more locations, separated by significant geographical 
distances. The medium of connectivity can be copper, optical fibre cable or 
wireless, as may be found feasible. Such wide area networks, in a way, create a 
highway for electronic transfer of information in the form of voice, video and data. 
Department of IT in Government of India is implementing an approved Scheme 
known as State Wide Area Network (SWAN) Scheme, envisaged to create such a 
connectivity in each State / UT, to bring speed, efficiency, reliability and 
accountability in overall system of Government-to-Government (G2G) functioning. 
When fully implemented, SWAN would work as a converged backbone network for 
voice, video and data communications across States / UTs. SWAN is designed to 
cater to the governance information and communication requirements of all the 
State / UT Departments. When fully implemented, SWANs across the country are 
expected to cover at least 50000 departmental offices through 1 million (10 lacs) 
route kilometres of communication links.   Implementation of the SWAN Scheme is 
in full swing in 33 States/ UTs. 
IT for Masses 
13.21  
 “IT for Masses” is a Plan Scheme of Department of Information 
Technology (DIT). It was introduced in the Tenth Five Year Plan and continuing in the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan with the objective to provide financial assistance to various 
project proposals from States/UT’s and Autonomous Societies for implementing ICT 
projects for development of Gender, SC & ST.  The ultimate goal of “IT For Masses” 
scheme has been “Inclusive Growth” and this can only be achieved through skill 
development, capacity building exercises, creating IT Infrastructure for empowering 
Women and SC/ST communities 
 
13.22  
The Draft National Policy on Information Technology 2011 seeks to 
bring ICT within the reach of the whole of India while at the same time harnessing the 
immense human resource potential in the country to enable it to emerge as the global 

hub and destination for IT-ITeS Services by 2020. The NeGP comprises mission mode 
projects (MMPs) and core e-infrastructure. Significant progress has been made in laying 
down core e-infrastructure and in most of the MMPs. More than 97,000 common service 
centres (CSCs) have been established across the country as web enabled service 
access points for making public services available to citizens on anytime, anywhere 
basis. Initiatives under the NeGP also include online services related to income tax, 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) 21, passports, and central excise. The government 
has also initiated new e-Governance projects for education, health, public distribution 
system and postal services. This will ensure the common man access to quality 
education, cost efficient and quality health care and postal services at affordable costs. 
The number of public services available to citizens in electronic mode will be expanded 
through the Electronic  delivery of Services (EDS) Bill, approved by the union cabinet on 
20th December 2011. In order to leverage the rapid growth in penetration of mobile 
technology and connectivity and also to ensure accessibility to all services to the 
common man, public services under all eGovernance projects will be delivered through 
mobile devices like mobile phones and Aakash tablets. Further, basic banking services, 
i.e. cash withdrawal, cash deposit, balance inquiry, and transfer of money from one 
account to another, will be extended to every panchayat through the CSCs and money 
transfer facility to every village by December 2013, leveraging ICT and mobile 
technology. This will help make financial inclusion a reality with the help of IT.  
 
13.23  
Sources of information for IT Sector : Certain data, in particular, data on 
the telecommunication sector, the IT industry and business process outsourcing (BPO) 
and data on the information society at large, are produced on a regular basis. A 
significant amount of data exists on the IT service industry, collected by National 
Association of Software and Services Companies (NASSCOM), reflecting their 
members’ data. In India, the indicators related to workforce, value added, imports & 
exports respectively are not strictly measured as per the International Standard 
Industrial Classification (ISIC). However, the information related to workforce & exports 
for this sector is maintained in National Association of Software and Services 
Companies (NASSCOM) for the IT-BPO sector. Similarly, data on IT manufacturing is 
captured by another private body, the Communication and Manufacturing Association of 
India (CMAI). 
 
• NASSCOM is a premier trade body as well as the Chamber of Commerce of IT-
BPO sector in India. It is a not-for-profit organization and has emerged as an 
authentic voice of this industry in India. It publishes an annual edition of its 
strategic review to disseminate the latest status of the industry based on the 
survey of large companies of this sector. 
 
• The data related to production, exports and imports of this sector is also 
maintained by the Ministry of Communication and Technology.  
 
• Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) maintains information on 
teledensity , number of internet subscribers etc.  
 

• National Sample Survey Office (NSSO) of the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation, which conducts multi-subject integrated sample 
surveys all over the country, will conduct survey on the basis of a 10 year time 
frame on the number of household using computers (HH5). NSSO has been 
conducting , Annual Survey of Industries (ASI), regularly whereby  information 
related to the use of ICT is also collected. 
 
• Recently Govt. of India, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
(MOSPI) has signed an MOU to participate in the project on “Statistical 
Compilation of IT Sector and Policy Analysis” undertaken by Orbicom, the 
network of UNESCO Chairs in Communication. In this project an attempt has 
been made to compile data on the contribution of IT sector to the Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) and employment to the Indian economy following internationally 
accepted and harmonized definitions and concepts emerging from the OECD and 
United Nations. The value added has been compiled from the existing data 
holdings of the MOSPI. 
 
• Office of Registrar General of India, MHA also collects some information on 
availability of computers/laptops with/without internet connection, telephone 
connection etc. as a part of household amenities in households all over India 
during its decennial Census exercise. 
 
 
 
References:  
• Economic Survey 2012. 
• Millennium Development Goals, India Country Report 2011 
• World Millennium Development Goals Report , 2012  
• Annual Report 2011-12 of Department of Electronics & Information Technology 
• Census of India 2011 Website  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
