Mapping the 
FinTech innovation 
landscape in India 
 
 

2   PwC   |  Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India
2 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

3   PwC   |  Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India
Table of contents 
Foreword from PwC ..................................................................................................................... 04 
Executive summary ...................................................................................................................... 05 
Glossary ........................................................................................................................................ 07 
Setting the context: Innovation landscape in India and globally ............................................. 08 
Framework for innovation ......................................................................................................... 08 
Increasing focus on innovation ................................................................................................. 10 
Growth drivers ........................................................................................................................... 11 
Demand-side drivers ............................................................................................................ 11 
Supply-side drivers .............................................................................................................. 11 
Innovation trends across the globe ............................................................................................ 16 
Build vs procure vs partner ....................................................................................................... 21 
Key drivers of partnerships ....................................................................................................... 26 
Emerging partnership themes ................................................................................................... 29 
Way forward .................................................................................................................................. 34 
Appendix ....................................................................................................................................... 35 
Methodology ............................................................................................................................. 35 
3 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

4   PwC   |  Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India
Foreword from PwC 
Vivek Belgavi 
Leader – FinTech and Alliances and Ecosystems 
PwC India 
There has been a constant flux within the financial 
the respondents see partnerships as a crucial level for 
landscape, which is being driven by advancements 
driving innovation in a BFSI organisation.1 Partnerships that 
in technology and evolving customer needs. PwC’s 
can enhance customer experience through personalised 
innovation framework highlights the key areas of product 
acquisition and seamless onboarding process enable better 
development and distribution with a focus on the key 
management of risk and compliance, and those that focus 
dimensions of product, channel, technology and business 
on specific ecosystems for diversifying service offerings 
model innovation. This report focuses on identifying some 
are expected to see increased traction in the industry. The 
of the critical drivers of innovation such as improved 
report highlights these and provides more such insights into 
customer engagement and diversified product propositions, 
the innovation and partnership landscape. 
deciphering the view of the BFSI industry on partnerships 
Despite a few challenges, most of the industry remains 
for driving innovation, and exploring the impact and 
optimistic regarding the growth of FinTechs – especially in 
challenges faced by companies while adopting innovative 
the areas of risk management, payments and lending – with 
ways to conduct business. 
more mature and sustainable business models focused 
The insights in the report a inferences based on primary 
on long-term viability. We hope that this report serves as a 
research inputs from senior members of financial institutions 
valuable resource for stakeholders navigating innovations in 
and FinTechs. Most respondents considered diversifying 
the FinTech ecosystem. 
and identifying new products as the primary objective 
We would like to extend our gratitude to the NPCI, PCI and 
for innovation. Furthermore, meeting evolving customer 
FCC for organising the GFF 2024 and inviting PwC India to 
needs emerged as the most prioritised business driver 
be a knowledge partner. 
for innovation among organisations. More than 90% of 
Mihir Gandhi 
Leader – Payments Transformation 
PwC India 
1 PwC survey and analysis 
4 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

5   PwC   |  Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India
Executive summary 
The global FinTech landscape is undergoing a phase of 
The choice of an organisation’s innovation mode – whether 
transformation marked by innovation in processes, ideas, 
to build, procure or partner – depends on several factors, 
products and services in the financial sector. To this end, 
including time to market, integration and interaction needs, 
PwC has developed an innovation framework that explores 
scalability, revenue generation, cost optimisation and talent 
the lifecycle of innovation, while emphasising the areas of 
requirements. Collaborative innovation between established 
product development and distribution. Innovation, when 
companies and FinTechs can offer advantages such as 
looked at through these lenses of product development and 
access to specialised expertise, faster innovation and 
distribution, encompasses transformations across the four 
market entry, alignment with regulatory standards, shared 
dimensions of technology, product, channel and business 
risks and costs, and improved customer experience and 
models. 
market reach. 
The primary drivers that catalyse innovations include 
By conducting primary research in the form of interviews 
technological advancements, evolving customer 
with senior management representatives from 31 financial 
expectations, increasing competitiveness, a focus on 
institutions and FinTech firms, we’ve identified the factors 
equitable growth and regulatory reforms. These factors are 
driving innovation, industry’s perspective on partnerships 
contributing to a thriving FinTech ecosystem. Some of the 
to catalyse innovation, and impact and challenges faced by 
factors driving innovation on the demand and supply sides 
the industry as it traverses the path to innovation. 
include changing consumer preferences for value-driven 
engagement and frictionless experiences, technological 
advancements, digital public infrastructure, business 
models shifts, employee-driven initiatives and a competitive 
market space. 
5 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 
-
Summary of insights from the primary research 
Figure 1. Summary of insights from the primary research 
Organisations are prioritising innovation to diversify 
their product and service offerings to address evolving 
customer needs and maintain market competitiveness. 
Innovation initiatives are aimed at enhancing customer 
experience, optimising risk management and improving 
operational efficiencies through the establishment of 
innovation labs, R&D centres, idea generation platforms 
and strategic partnerships. 
While innovation initiatives are leading to new product 
development and enhanced efficiencies, they are 
facing talent resource constraints and complexities of 
managing emerging technologies. 
Source: PwC analysis 
The FinTech landscape is shifting towards collaborative 
innovation with partnerships being viewed as the key 
driver of organisational innovation, with speed-to 
market being a key factor driving this trend. 
Partnerships are leading to tangible benefits like 
increased account opening productivity, new product 
offerings and reduced operational expenses, while 
challenges such as API maturity, speed-to-market and 
system integration remain. 
Emerging themes for FinTech partnerships include 
improving risk and compliance, enhancing customer 
experience through seamless onboarding, embedded 
finance and ecosystem offerings. 

Imperatives on the research insights 
Financial institutions and FinTech firms can harness the potential of innovation by considering the following imperatives that 
have emerged from the insights of the research conducted. 
Figure 2. Key imperatives from research findings 
Key imperatives to foster innovation 
Leverage 
digital public 
infrastructure 
and upgrade 
organisational 
infrastructure, 
such as APIs for 
partnerships and 
sandboxes for 
proof of concepts, 
to facilitate 
innovation 
initiatives. 
Source: PwC analysis 
Cultivate an 
innovation-driven 
culture through 
active employee 
engagement. 
Establish a 
dedicated 
Innovation 
Management 
Office and 
Compliance 
Management 
Office to oversee 
innovation 
initiatives while 
ensuring regulatory 
adherence. 
Assess and 
determine 
the mode for 
innovation – 
build, procure or 
partner – based 
on strategic 
considerations. 
Develop FinTech/ 
partnership 
policies with 
defined roles, 
responsibilities 
and a criteria-
based evaluation 
process, including 
established KPIs. 
Implement a 
value realisation 
framework 
to measure 
the impact 
of innovation 
initiatives and 
partnerships on 
the organisation. 
6   PwC   |  Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India
The BFSI industry is optimistic about the growth of the FinTech ecosystem and is anticipating a growth in solutions – 
specifically in payment systems, risk management, and expansion into other non-FS sectors such as real estate, retail, 
and telecom. With the growing awareness on cyber and data risk solutions, FinTechs are also developing solutions 
independently and through partnerships, with a focus on regulatory compliance and long-term sustainability. 
6 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

Glossary 
7 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 
Sr. no. 
Acronym 
Full form 
AI 
Artificial intelligence 
AMC 
Asset management company 
APAC 
Asia-Pacific 
API 
Application programming interface 
BFSI 
Banking, financial services and insurance 
CBDC 
Central Bank Digital Currency 
CX 
Customer experience 
DeFi 
Decentralised finance 
EMEA 
Europe, Middle-East and Africa 
ESG 
Environmental, social and governance 
FCC 
FinTech Convergence Council 
FI 
Financial institution 
FS 
Financial services 
FY 
Financial year 
GenAI 
Generative AI 
GRC 
Governance, risk and compliance 
JAM 
Jan-Dhan, Aadhaar and mobile 
LLM 
Large language models 
ML 
Machine learning 
MSME 
Micro, small and medium enterprises 
NPCI 
National Payments Corporation of India 
NTC 
New-to-credit 
OCEN 
Open Network for Digital Commerce 
ONDC 
Open Credit Enablement Network 
PCI 
Payments Council of India 
PIDF 
Payments Infrastructure Development Fund 
PoS 
Point of sale 
RBI 
Reserve Bank of India 
RBIH 
Reserve Bank Innovation Hub 
RPA 
Robotic process automation 
SaaS 
Software-as a-service 
SME 
Small and medium enterprises 
UPI 
Unified Payments Interface 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

Setting the context: Innovation 
landscape in India and globally 
Innovation is the cornerstone of every industry and can be understood as the ability to envision, create, deliver and scale 
new products, processes and business models to tackle existing challenges or capitalise on emerging opportunities within 
the industry. 
Thus, a framework can help organisations to structure their approach to fostering better innovation practices. While 
there are several existing innovation frameworks based on the product lifecycle or approaching it via a product–process 
perspective, PwC has developed a framework that merges these approaches, while examining the innovation lifecycle 
through the product and distribution lens. 
Framework for innovation 
Figure 3. Innovation management framework 
Innovation management framework 
Product 
New 
Existing 
Distribution 
New 
Technological innovation 
Channel innovation 
Existing 
Product innovation 
Business model innovation 
Source: PwC analysis 
1. Technological innovation 
2. Product innovation 
Companies are exploring innovative use cases in 
In this model, companies innovate their products and 
technology for creating new products or solutions, thereby 
solutions, while utilising their existing distribution channels 
enhancing existing product propositions and testing 
such as retail stores and other customer networks for 
alternate ways for distributing their products to solve issues 
a seamless market entry. The innovation cycle involves 
faced by customers. By integrating these new solutions 
stages like creating new ideas, developing them into 
and distribution methods (including retail partnerships, 
products or solutions, and testing the product in the 
new-age logistics solutions etc.), companies can potentially 
market. This is then followed by incorporating the new 
transform the current innovation landscape. 
product in the current distribution network for a seamless 
market entry. 
Example: A US-based FS company launched a product 
that can be directly plugged into mobile phones and used 
Example: The company mentioned previously introduced a 
to read credit or debit cards. The company distributed this 
new stand for digital tablets, which helped converting those 
new product through online sales and retail partnership 
tablets into ones having PoS capabilities. The company 
channels. The product was able to help SMEs to accept 
also leveraged its live partnerships with retail and online 
payments done through cards without investing in 
fronts to distribute its new product in the market. 
comparatively costlier PoS devices. 
8 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

 
3. Channel innovation 
Companies are also exploring new ways of distributing 
products and solutions that they have already developed. 
Some of the approaches include collaborations with retail 
players and e-commerce platforms, or developing new-
age logistics solutions – such as the emergence of ‘quick 
commerce’ in India. Companies are also exploring the use 
of digital public infrastructure – i.e. OCEN, ONDC and UPI 
– to distribute their product proposition and reach more 
customers through these platforms. The lifecycle in this 
form of innovation includes evaluating existing models of 
distribution, exploring and arriving at new channels, and 
then integrating existing products into these new channels 
to reach more customers. 
Example: The same FS company started offering 
payment processing services and expanded its reach 
beyond physical retail stores by partnering with popular 
e-commerce platforms and online marketplaces, allowing 
it to integrate seamlessly into a variety of online shopping 
environments. This strategic move enabled the company 
to tap a larger customer base and offer its solutions to a 
broader audience of online sellers and buyers. 
4. Business model innovation 
Business model innovation involves rethinking and 
transforming how an organisation creates, delivers and 
captures value using existing products and distribution 
channels – including changing revenue models, optimising 
operations and altering customer engagement strategies. 
This innovation lifecycle includes evaluating the current 
business model, identifying areas for improvement, 
redesigning processes, and implementing these 
changes to drive enhanced performance and customer 
satisfaction without altering the core product or distribution 
mechanisms. 
Example: The company also expanded its range of services 
by launching a lending service that uses transaction data 
to assess creditworthiness, along with other subscription 
tools (such as inventory management, marketing tools, 
cashflow management etc.) tailored for specific industries. 
This diversification allowed the company to enhance its 
value within existing channels, offering additional financial 
solutions without altering its core product lineup, which 
included card readers and POS terminals. 
This framework offers an approach for fostering growth 
and maintaining a competitive edge through strategic 
advancements in technology, product development, 
channel exploration and business model adjustments, 
and underscores the importance of a balanced approach 
to innovation – where each of those components 
contribute to the formation of a cohesive innovation 
strategy. 
9 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

10   PwC   |  Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India
Increasing focus on innovation 
The continuous pace of technological evolution, particularly 
in areas such as AI, blockchain and data analytics, has 
been creating new opportunities for re-imagining traditional 
financial services and processes. Typically, AI and LLMs 
have been enabling better customer service through 
interactive chatbots and personalisation, while blockchain 
is helping enable secure, transparent and efficient 
transactions. 
Furthermore, evolving consumer behaviour and 
expectations – driven by the rise of digital natives 
and increasing demand for personalised, seamless 
and convenient financial solutions – is encouraging 
incumbents and newcomers alike to innovate in order 
to stay competitive. Additionally, regulatory reforms 
and initiatives aimed at fostering competition – such 
as regulatory sandboxes, new licencing norms, digital 
public infrastructure – promoting financial inclusion and 
safeguarding data privacy catalyse innovation by creating 
a conducive environment for experimentation and market 
entry. An example of innovation in India driven by evolving 
consumer expectations and supportive regulatory reforms 
is the CBDC pilot initiated by the RBI. The digital rupee 
aims to offer a means of transaction that aligns with 
the growing demand for secure, seamless and efficient 
digital financial solutions. This initiative benefits from a 
regulatory environment that encourages experimentation 
and integration of new technologies into the financial 
system while addressing the need for modernised payment 
methods. 
Additionally, the advent of dynamic FinTech ecosystems 
comprising start-ups, accelerators, investors and 
incumbents collaborating and competing is fuelling a 
culture of innovation, knowledge sharing and ecosystem 
development. When combined, these factors contribute to 
the traction towards innovation in the FinTech landscape, 
driving transformative changes and shaping the future of 
financial institutions in India and beyond. 
10 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

 
 
 
 
 
1  https://www.topcoder.com/blog/generative-ai/
Growth drivers 
Demand-side drivers 
On the demand side, several factors are fuelling the 
demand for innovation in the FinTech sector. 
Evolving consumer preferences: India is experiencing 
a rise in its per capita income, as reflected by the growth 
in its gross national disposable income (which includes 
net primary income and other transfers received from the 
rest of the world), which is expected to expand by 8.9% in 
FY24.2 Along with this, there is an increase in consumerism, 
encouraging companies to innovate and capture a greater 
share of wallet of consumers. Additionally, with internet 
penetration in India reaching nearly 820 million users in 
2024,3 the increasing digitisation of day-to-day activities is 
transforming consumer preferences and thereby increasing 
the demand for digital products that offer enhanced 
convenience and accessibility. This is encouraging 
financial institutions and FinTech companies to offer more 
personalised products and seamless customer experiences. 
Companies are responding by adopting omnichannel 
strategies, leveraging big data and AI for personalisation, 
and implementing advanced feedback systems to refine 
services. This focus on improving customer engagement 
helps in meeting evolving expectations while also 
maximising customer lifetime value by delivering high-
quality, competitively priced products and services. 
Expansion of market base: Indian MSMEs are facing 
challenges in terms of limited access to credit as reflected 
by the credit gap of USD 530 billion faced by them as 
of FY24.4 The lack of credit history, inconsistent salaries 
and lower credit scores is affecting not only MSMEs but 
also a few other segments of the society including blue-
collar workers, migrants and labourers. In addition to this, 
digital payment solutions are increasingly being adopted 
by consumers from all backgrounds. Owing to this, digital 
transactions in India are expected to grow from USD 2 
trillion to USD 10 trillion by 2026 from 2023.5 Thus, there 
is a growing demand for innovative solutions that can 
address the credit needs of the underserved segment and 
increasing volume of digital payments. 
2 https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/indicators/ 
data-correction-indias-per-capita-disposable-income-put-at-2-14-l/ 
articleshow/108147382.cms?from=mdr 
3 https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/tech/technology/how-india-
is-using-the-internet/articleshow/108354854.cms?from=mdr 
4 https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/small-biz/sme-sector/ 
budget-2024-msme-data-stack-alternative-credit-assessment-
models-can-bridge-530-bn-credit-gap-says-industry/ 
articleshow/111745366.cms?from=mdr 
5 https://www.meity.gov.in/writereaddata/files/Impact-Assessment-
of-DigiDhan-Mission.pdf 
11 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 
Operational efficiency 
Reducing operational costs and inefficiencies have always 
been a major goal for companies worldwide, irrespective 
of the industry/domain. With the growing advancements in 
technology, companies are increasingly demanding digital 
solutions that utilise AI/ML, data analytics and automation, 
which can help them in optimising workflows and support 
them in their decision making. These solutions can also 
help companies in cost optimisation by improving their 
internal efficiencies. 
Supply-side drivers 
Technological advancements: Transformations across the 
value chain in the BFSI industry are potentially being driven 
by the breakthroughs in technologies such as  
AI/ML, intelligent automation, blockchain and quantum 
computing. These technologies are enabling FinTechs and 
other FS providers to develop new products and services. 
For instance, blockchain-based smart contracts are being 
used by InsurTechs to improve the efficiency of automated 
claims management. GenAI is gaining traction as it has 
the potential to transform business models across multiple 
sectors including risk management, fraud detection and 
customer support. A recent PwC survey indicates that 
54% of companies have implemented GenAI in a few 
areas of their businesses.6 Through its capability to analyse 
large amounts of data, GenAI could potentially be used to 
personalise FS products and scale customer engagement, 
while helping reduce operational costs. 
Digital public infrastructure and regulatory initiatives: 
The JAM trinity has been a focus of the Indian Government 
to improve financial inclusion. From the time of its 
implementation, Aadhaar has been instrumental in helping 
companies with over 118 billion digital authentications.7  
The Government is also working on further developing the 
country’s digital public infrastructure with new initiatives 
such as API Setu, AgriStack and HealthStack. Furthermore, 
the RBI is working towards creating a regulatory 
environment that fosters innovation while focusing on 
consumer protection through initiatives such as the RBIH 
and regulatory sandbox. Thus, in times of increasing 
complexity of financial transactions and rising cybersecurity 
attacks, innovation in risk management, compliance 
and security practices will act as key growth drivers for 
FinTechs. 
6 https://www.pwc.com/us/en/tech-effect/ai-analytics/ai-predictions. 
html 
7 https://uidai.gov.in/aadhaar_dashboard/ 

 
Employee-driven innovation: Companies are nurturing a 
culture of innovation by encouraging employees to think 
creatively and generate new ideas. Incentive programmes 
reward innovative contributions, while collaborative tools 
and continuous learning opportunities help employees 
attain the skills needed to drive innovation. Additionally, 
companies can leverage their innovation-centric culture 
to attract talented individuals who are eager to work on 
cutting-edge solutions and technologies in the industry. 
Competition landscape: Healthy competition in any 
industry fosters a constant flow of innovation by companies 
to stay ahead and maintain their relevance in the market. 
While new players in the industry may innovate by creating 
breakthrough products or business models, or designing 
distribution methods, established players may try to come 
up with innovative methods of achieving more process and 
cost efficiencies in their existing products and distribution 
channels, and leveraging them to reduce the time-to-
market of new products. 
Ecosystem development: The increasing popularity of 
open banking, platformisation and ecosystem integration 
is leading to the transformation of traditional business 
models in finance. APIs are leading the creation of 
new opportunities for innovation and value creation via 
partnerships and ecosystem-driven strategies by facilitating 
easy integration and collaboration between different 
financial services providers. 
Therefore, as India’s FinTech landscape matures, it is slowly 
moving from individual technological breakthroughs and 
product innovations to a more collaborative approach. 
This collaborative innovation stems from the synergies 
created when incumbents offer their resources and financial 
expertise to tech start-ups which add their agility and 
technological capabilities to the mix. Moreover, it facilitates 
the creation of new products and services that are better 
than the individual capabilities of either of the partners. 
For this report, we have conducted primary research 
to identify and understand the various factors that 
drive innovation within an organisation and explore 
perspectives on innovations facilitated through 
partnerships. For this research, we interviewed the 
senior management representatives from 31 FIs 
(banks, insurance companies, AMCs) and FinTech 
companies across the BFSI industry. Both qualitative 
and quantitative information collected during this 
process were analysed to identify significant trends 
in terms of FinTech innovation and understand the 
partnership landscape. The gathered insights were 
then used to arrive at key imperatives for FIs to 
harness the potential of innovation.8 
8 The sum of all responses collected in some questions may exceed 
100%. This is due to the respondents being allowed to mark 
multiple answers. 
12 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

Primary research findings 
Figure 4: What innovation means for different organisations 
What does innovation mean to your organisation? 
Diversifying and identifying new products/services 
New methods of engaging/retaining customers 
Expansion to new customer segments 
Simplifying/updating process 
New means of risk mitigation 
Streamlining expenses and revenues 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
83.90% 
61.00% 
58.10% 
51.60% 
45.20% 
22.60% 
Other opinions expressed 
• 
Identifying the core tasks customers need to accomplish and develop cost-effective, frictionless methods to achieve them
• 
Strategising to increase customer engagement and appeal 
• 
Focusing on business outcomes like boosting sales, reducing costs, mitigating risks and enhancing customer satisfaction 
• 
Exploring and implementing cutting-edge technologies such as GenAI and quantum computing 
• 
Developing scalable digital public infrastructure solutions that maintain cost efficiency 
Source: PwC survey and analysis 
 
In the survey response to what innovation means to their organisations, several key themes emerge. Firstly, 
diversifying and identifying new products or services is a primary objective for many respondents, with approximately 
84% of respondents suggesting its significance. This suggests a strategic emphasis on expanding their offerings 
to cater to evolving market demands and opportunities. Additionally, there is an inclination towards adopting new 
methods for engaging and retaining customers, indicating a proactive approach to enhancing customer relationships 
and satisfaction. Furthermore, expansion into new customer segments and the exploration of new means of risk 
mitigation are recurrent themes, highlighting a strategic intent to broaden market reach while also safeguarding 
operational resilience. 
Moreover, many respondents emphasised the importance of streamlining processes and optimising expenses and 
revenues. This underscores a drive towards operational efficiency and financial sustainability alongside innovation 
efforts. Some responses also mentioned the integration of advanced technologies, such as GenAI and quantum 
computing, which suggests a forward-looking approach to leveraging cutting-edge tools for innovation. Overall, 
these varied responses collectively illustrate a multifaceted understanding of innovation within organisations, 
encompassing product diversification, customer engagement strategies, operational improvements, risk 
management, and the strategic adoption of emerging technologies to drive future growth and competitiveness. 
13 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Primary research findings 
Figure 5. Key business drivers for innovation within organisations 
What are the key business drivers that are driving innovation within your organisation? 
Meeting evolving customer demands 
Risk mitigation - adapting to changing 
regulatory landscape 
Market competitiveness 
Growth in revenue and cost efficiency 
Brand differentiation 
Improving productivity 
Employee experience 
Talent attraction 
84% 
65% 
61% 
55% 
35% 
35% 
13% 
6% 
Other opinions expressed 
• 
Anticipating and solving for customer needs 
• 
Digital innovation for payments 
• 
Creating impact in the industry by simplifying and standardising the processes to drive innovation 
Source: PwC survey and analysis 
The survey highlighted that 84% of FIs and FinTechs in India prioritise strategies to understand and meet evolving 
customer demands. Additionally, 65% of organisations consider risk mitigation and adapting to changing regulatory 
landscapes as critical factors, underscoring the importance of navigating regulatory challenges while innovating. 
Market competitiveness follows closely as another important factor, cited by approximately 61% of respondents, 
highlighting a strong focus on maintaining or enhancing market position through innovative practices. 
The survey revealed that 55% of respondents consider growth in revenue and achieving cost efficiency as important 
drivers, reflecting a focus on both profitability and operational effectiveness. Additionally, 35% highlighted brand 
differentiation, while 32% emphasised improving productivity, suggesting that organisations are strategically aiming 
to distinguish their offerings in the market and optimise internal processes to drive innovation. Overall, the survey 
illustrates a comprehensive approach to innovation, combining competitive strategies with customer-centricity, 
financial objectives, regulatory compliance and operational excellence to foster sustainable growth and differentiation 
in their respective markets. 
14 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

 
 
 
Figure 6. Organisations’ reliance on in-house initiatives vs external partnerships for innovation 
Does your organisation prefer to foster innovation in-house or rely on external partnerships? 
45% 
3% 
52% 
Only in-house 
Only external 
Both 
Source: PwC survey and analysis 
Primary research findings 
According to the survey responses, approximately 
45% of the participants prefer to promote innovation 
primarily through internal initiatives, indicating a strong 
preference for using internal resources and expertise 
to drive innovation. In contrast, only one respondent 
stated that they rely exclusively on external partnerships 
to innovate, thereby highlighting a deliberate choice to 
collaborate with external entities to improve innovation 
capabilities. Of the organisations surveyed, 52% 
mentioned adopting a hybrid approach, incorporating 
both in-house initiatives and external partnerships 
to promote innovation. This dual strategy reflects a 
balanced approach where organisations aim to capitalise 
on internal strengths while utilising external resources 
and expertise to accelerate innovation efforts and 
achieve strategic objectives. 
15 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1. Innovation use cases across the globe 
Innovation use 
cases 
India 
APAC 
Americas 
EMEA 
Build 
•
A real-time payments
system that enables
instant money
transfers between
bank accounts using
a mobile interface for
quick and seamless
transaction
•
Mobile wallets
that facilitate
seamless monetary
transactions and
integrate various
financial services
•
SuperApps that
combine multiple
Technology companies 
that build economic 
infrastructure for the 
internet, providing 
payment processing and 
financial services for 
online businesses 
•
Digital banking
platforms that
offer a range of
financial services,
from savings to
investments to meet
evolving customer
needs
•
A licence model for
online-only banking
services that offers
a range of financial
products without the
need for physical
branches, improving
accessibility to
customers
•
A digital public
infrastructure that
companies can
leverage to build
their products
and distribution
strategies
services, including
payments, ride-
hailing and food
delivery, into a
single platform to
offer customers a
streamlined digital
experience
•
Mobile-first
neobanks that
operate primarily
through a mobile
app, focusing on
user-friendly digital
services, curated
for the digital-first
consumer
Procure 
•
FinTech platforms
Payment companies
•
Payment processing
Banks across the globe 
acquiring licences
acquiring companies
companies acquiring
upgrading and acquiring
through company
specialising in biomet-
other payment
their core banking sys-
acquisitions
ric authentication to 
companies in other
tems with leading SaaS
•
Payment companies
acquiring technology,
enhance their security 
processes 
countries to expand
there
companies 
risk and capital
•
Payment processing
solutions
company acquiring a
rewards platform to
integrate cashback
and discount
features, enhancing
the value proposition
for users
 
Innovation trends 
across the globe 
Let’s explore a range of global innovations, categorised into three key approaches: build, procure and partner. The ‘build’ 
section illustrates how companies in different regions are developing new financial technologies – such as real-time 
payment systems, digital banking platforms and integrated financial services. The ‘procure’ category highlights how firms 
are enhancing their offerings through acquisitions – including technology, licences and strategic acquisitions – to expand 
capabilities and integrate new features. Lastly, the ‘partner’ category gives emphasis to collaborative approaches, reflecting 
how partnerships between FinTechs, banks and other entities are driving innovation and expanding service ecosystems. 
16 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Partner 
• 
FinTech – 
• 
Mobile wallets 
Banks partnering with
• 
Banks partnering
e-commerce 
partnering with other
other companies to
with FinTechs to 
partnerships to 
start-ups to expand
launch integrated credit 
integrate open
create their monetary 
their services and 
or debit cards 
banking services,
ecosystems 
build a superApp 
enhancing 
• 
FinTech – bank 
partnerships to
increase the speed-
to-market of digital 
• 
Tech companies and
investors partnering
to foster FinTech 
innovation and 
transparency and 
customer control 
over financial 
information 
products 
support the growth 
• 
Banks launching
of emerging FinTech 
their accelerators to 
start-ups through
invest in start-ups
an accelerator 
and foster innovation 
programme 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Primary research findings 
Figure 7. Key areas of focus for innovation initiatives 
What are the key areas your innovation initiatives are focused on? 
Customer experience and engagement - acquisition, 
onboarding and servicing 
Risk management 
Operations 
Product distribution 
Regulatory compliance 
45% 
52% 
55% 
61% 
84% 
Other opinions expressed 
• 
Partner connectedness 
• 
Identity and access management 
• 
Payments and related services 
• 
Employee experience 
Source: PwC survey and analysis 
17   PwC   |  Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India
In examining the responses gathered on innovation 
initiatives within the FinTech sector in India, we 
identified an increased focus on enhancing customer 
experience and engagement, with nearly 84% of 
respondents considering it as one of their primary 
areas of innovation. Additionally, over 50% of the 
respondents highlighted product distribution as a 
key area of innovation. It can also be noted that the 
frequent references to risk management, operations 
and regulatory compliance across several responses 
highlight the sector’s diligence in maintaining 
robust governance frameworks amidst ongoing 
technological advancements. 
17 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

Primary research findings 
Figure 8. Key critical emerging technologies enabling innovation initiatives 
What are the key critical emerging technologies you are focusing as part of your innovation initiatives? 
AI and GenAI 
26% 
32% 
45% 
58% 
74% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
90% 
Data analytics 
Open banking and API solution 
Digital banking solutions 
RPA/Intelligent automation 
Blockchain/DeFi 
Source: PwC survey and analysis 
The responses analysed on critical emerging technologies within the FinTech sector in India reveal a strong focus 
on AI and GenAI, with 90% of the respondents citing them as the primary technology enablers of innovation. Data 
analytics also continues to emerge prominently across nearly 74% responses, underscoring its integral role in driving 
insights and decision-making within FS. Open banking and API solutions are highlighted by 58% of the respondents, 
reflecting efforts to enhance connectivity and interoperability across platforms. 
Additionally, technologies such as RPA and intelligent automation were recognised by some respondents for their 
potential in streamlining operations and optimising workflows, while a few of the respondents mentioned blockchain 
and DeFi, thereby highlighting a growing interest in secure and transparent transaction frameworks that could 
transform the FS landscape. 
18 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

19 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 
Primary research findings 
Figure 9. Impact as a result of innovation initiatives 
What is the kind of impact you have seen as a result of innovation initiatives? 
65% 
23% 
3% 
19% 
6% 
32%
29% 
42% 
39% 
29% 
26% 
48% 
55% 
42% 
42% 
Enhanced CX 
Improved efficiencies 
for existing processes 
Expanded market 
New product innovation 
reach 
Financial inclusion and 
societal impact 
No impact 
Moderate impact 
Significant impact 
Source: PwC survey and analysis 
According to the analysed responses regarding the impact of innovation initiatives, strong emphasis was placed on 
new product innovation and enhanced efficiencies in existing processes, with over 93% and 90% of the respondents 
respectively noting that these two areas have seen substantial positive effects. Additionally, they reported moderate 
improvements in expanding market reach (80%) and enhancing customer experience (77%). This indicates that while 
companies are successfully leveraging innovation to optimise their core operations and product offerings, there may 
be a possibility of using these initiatives to further penetrate markets and elevate customer satisfaction. 
Apart from this, respondents also stated that their innovation initiatives have enabled more efficient business 
operations, better customer interactions, simplified processes, cost reductions and positive feedback from regulatory 
partners. Internal policy initiatives, product differentiation, improved employee engagement and productivity, and 
better customer engagement and retention were also noted as other impacts of innovation initiatives.  

–
20 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 
Primary research findings 
Figure 10. Key challenges faced during ongoing innovation initiatives 
What are some key challenges faced when running your innovation initiatives? 
52% 
52% 
52%
48% 
13% 
45% 
32% 
29% 
29% 
39% 
42% 
35% 
10% 
35% 
13% 
19% 
35% 
19% 
Cultural resistance 
Resource constraints 
(talent) 
Siloed organisation 
structure 
Lack of clear strategy 
before execution 
Technology 
complexity 
Impact 
measurement 
Source: PwC survey and analysis 
No challenge 
Moderate challenge 
Significant challenge 
The primary challenges most companies encountered 
while running their innovation initiatives were 
resource constraints – particularly in terms of talent 
and the technological complexity associated with 
new technologies, with approximately 35% of the 
respondents mentioning them as significant challenges 
and 52% and 35% of the respondents naming the 
same factors (resource constraints and technology 
complexity respectively) to be moderate challenges 
respectively. Additional challenges included measuring 
the impact of innovation initiatives, absence of a clear 
strategy prior to initiating innovation and, in some cases, 
a siloed organisational structure posing moderate 
difficulty. Notably, cultural resistance was not identified 
as a significant challenge by over half (52%) of the 
respondents, indicating that innovation is adopted and 
promoted within the organisations surveyed. A few 
other challenges included managing the shift between 
established and innovative business models, engaging 
multiple departments towards a common innovation 
goal, balancing capital allocation for various innovation 
projects, fostering a culture of experimentation, and 
adapting to disruptive technologies. 

Build vs procure vs partner 
In the ever-changing FS landscape, FIs are continually faced with the important decision of whether to develop solutions in-
house, procure them from third-party vendors or collaborate with specialised firms to leverage the partner’s solution. Each 
option has its distinct advantages and challenges, which can impact an institution’s ability to innovate, compete and meet 
regulatory requirements. Understanding the factors influencing the decision to build, procure or partner is thus important 
for strategic decision-making, enabling financial institutions to leverage technology effectively and deliver enhanced 
value to their customers. This section explores the key factors that influence these decisions, providing insights into the 
circumstances under which institutions can opt for each approach. 
21 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 
 
 
 
 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Table 2. Factors affecting modes of innovation 
S No 
Factors 
Build 
Procure 
Partner 
1 
Time to market 
Higher risk of project 
delays, scope creep 
and other potential 
challenges 
Typically, better time-to-market 
than build with ready-made 
solutions 
Faster time-to-market with 
shared resources and expertise 
Span of control – 
integrations and 
interactions 
Scalability of operation 
Revenue growth and 
cost management 
There is greater control 
over the development 
process and 
intellectual property. 
There would be 
minimal dependencies
on external 
stakeholders for 
scalability. 
Building a solution
from scratch may 
require extensive 
resources if it’s outside 
of the company’s 
existing operations. 
Talent requirement 
Building innovative 
solutions typically 
requires highly 
specialised knowledge 
and skills. 
• 
There can be integration 
challenges with existing
systems and processes. 
• 
The procured solution 
may not fully meet specific 
institutional requirements 
without additional 
customisation. 
There would be a dependency 
on external vendors for updates, 
maintenance and support. 
Procuring a solution from a 
vendor may be cost effective 
but might incur repeated 
subscription or maintenance 
costs. 
Existing vendors in the market 
can handle the requirement 
for talent in case of procuring 
solutions. 
However, since the solution is 
already present in the market, 
it may not be exclusive to the 
organisation procuring it. 
Partnerships can pose certain 
challenges in terms of sharing
sensitive data or intellectual 
property in the form of legal 
and contractual complexities. 
• 
There would be 
dependency on partners 
for strategic decisions and 
direction. 
• 
There’s potential for 
misalignment of goals, 
culture and priorities 
between partners. 
Cost of development will be 
shared in case of partnerships 
Partnering organisations can 
merge their specific talent 
capabilities for the purpose of
producing innovative solutions. 
Significant challenge 
Moderate challenge 
Advantage 
Source: PwC analysis 

 
 
 
 
Build 
Building solutions from scratch requires extensive 
resources, in terms of money as well as talent, but may 
allow for better customisation and control over the 
innovation process. FIs can opt for building their own 
solutions if there aren’t any solutions available in the 
market, and if they can afford the time, money and talent 
required to build something in-house. 
Procure 
FIs may prefer procuring innovative solutions from external 
vendors in cases where speed-to-market is a priority. 
These solutions can be cost-efficient compared to building 
solutions in-house. However, there could be some trade-
offs in terms of lack of customisation and integration 
challenges. Moreover, FIs would have to depend on the 
service providers for support and maintenance. 
Partner 
FIs can partner or collaborate with other players to leverage 
their emerging technology solutions and resources to 
collaboratively build or develop innovative solutions. For 
FIs, this could also involve having a reduced span of control 
in terms of ownership of their data or customers. 
FIs often choose between these three forms of 
innovation based on their strategic needs and 
requirements. The decision of FIs is dependent on 
factors such as specific customisation needs, cost 
consideration, risk management strategies and speed-
to-market. 
Compared to the approaches of building solutions 
in-house and procuring solutions from third-party 
service providers, partnerships and collaborations offer 
organisations an option to leverage the expertise and 
resources from multiple organisations in the FinTech 
landscape. Partnerships and collaborations are valued 
for their capability to accelerate innovation timelines, 
manage and proactively mitigate risks, and provide 
access to combined resource capabilities which can 
be difficult to build separately. Partnerships also help 
combine the financial and regulatory expertise that 
incumbents might have with the technological tools 
and innovation culture that start-ups and FinTechs have 
in a synergistic manner to develop new solutions or 
enhance existing solutions for engaging better with the 
customers. 
Primary research findings 
The analysis of the data from the survey indicated 
that most of the organisations (58%) did not have 
a separate vertical or business unit for managing 
their innovations. This shows that the organisations 
focused on their innovation initiatives by leveraging 
temporary and smaller teams in a decentralised 
manner. However, traditional and established FIs 
including banks and insurance companies typically 
focused on their innovation initiatives in a structured 
manner through separate innovation teams. 
22 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 
Figure 11. Organisations having separate vertical or 
business unit for managing innovations 
Does your organisation have a separate vertical/ business
 
unit for managing your innovations? 
58%
42% 
Yes 
No 
Source: PwC survey and analysis 

Primary research findings 
Figure 12. End form factor of innovation initiatives 
What is the end form factor of your innovation initiatives? 
Partnerships and collaborations 
Idea generation platforms - channeling employee inputs 
Co-creation initiatives 
Innovation labs and R&D CoE - exploring emerging tech 
solutions 
Training and development - for improving employee 
capability 
Campus programmes and hackathons 
Accelerators and incubators 
32% 
42% 
42% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58% 
48% 
23% 
6% 
Other opinions expressed 
• 
Small and high-quality teams to tackle innovation 
• 
AI garage teams 
• 
Innovation for internal or external products post 
• 
Testing new concepts through prototypes 
experimentation 
• 
Tech development pipeline 
• 
Innovation as an essential part of all product initiatives as 
a culture, rather than separate innovation initiatives 
Source: PwC survey and analysis 
The survey responses revealed a few key trends on the end 
form factors of innovation within organisations. The responses 
indicated that organisations focused on setting up innovation 
labs, R&D centres of excellence and idea-generation platforms 
and used them to develop solutions integrated with cutting-edge 
technologies. This highlighted the investments from organisations 
for cultivating internal research capabilities and enabling 
employees to contribute to the organisation’s innovation initiatives. 
It can also be noted that the primary end form factor of the 
innovation initiatives was in the form of partnerships and 
collaborations, as mentioned by 58% of the respondents. This 
highlights the importance given by organisations to collaborations 
as part of their innovation strategy, as these might enable them to 
leverage external expertise in terms of technologies and insights. 
These partnerships between FIs and other entities including 
start-ups, FinTechs and accelerators can improve the pace of 
innovation and help optimise the cost of innovation by sharing 
resources. 
23 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

Figure 13. Benefits of collaboration between incumbents and FinTech start-ups 
Incumbents 
FinTech start-ups 
FinTech companies provide financial 
Access to specialised 
expertise and resources 
Tech firms gain from financial 
institutions with cutting-edge tech 
institutions’ regulatory expertise, 
skills, avoiding the need for in-house 
ensuring innovations are compliant 
development. 
and effective. 
Start-ups bring agility and rapid 
Partnerships speed up product 
iteration, crucial for staying 
development and deployment 
competitive in the fast-evolving 
by pooling financial and human 
FinTech space. 
resources. 
Collaborating with technology 
Financial institutions help tech firms 
partners who understand regulatory 
Regulatory and compliance 
alignment 
navigate regulatory challenges, 
complexities can promote 
ensuring scalable, industry-standard 
innovation with a compliance-
solutions. 
focused approach. 
Collaborative efforts distribute 
Start-ups benefit from financial 
risks and costs, reducing individual 
institutions’ capital and 
exposure for financial institutions. 
infrastructure, enabling better 
scaling of innovations. 
Combining financial and tech 
Enhanced customer experience 
and market penetration 
Partnerships expand market reach, 
expertise creates comprehensive, 
improving penetration and adoption
user-centric solutions that stand out 
rates for new FinTech solutions. 
in the market. 
Source: PwC analysis 
Accelerated innovation and 
time-to-market 
Risk sharing and cost 
efficiency 
 
 
 
 
Primary research findings 
Figure 14. Partnerships as a means to drive innovation within the FS ecosystem 
Do partnerships act as a means to drive innovation within the FS ecosystem? 
94% 
6% 
Yes 
No 
Source: PwC survey and analysis 
The emphasis on partnerships and collaboration in FinTech innovation may arise from the multiple benefits that 
leverage the strengths of each party involved. Some of these benefits may include: 
Analysis of the survey responses highlights the consensus from 94% of the respondents that collaborations 
and partnerships are fostering innovation within the FS ecosystem. 
24 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

Figure 15. Tangible benefits of partnerships 
What are some of the tangible benefits you have seen as a result of partnerships? 
58%
55% 
55% 
52% 
48% 
45% 
39% 
35% 
32% 
32% 
32%
29% 
26% 
26%
23%23% 
23% 
23%
19%
16% 
10% 
Loan productivity 
Loan volumes 
Operational 
Account opening 
Account opening 
expenses 
productivity 
volume 
No impact 
Moderate impact 
Significant impact 
Source: PwC survey and analysis 
New product 
Fraud losses 
offerings 
Primary research findings 
The analysis of the data collected on the impact seen from partnerships in the 
FS sector indicate that the value driven through these partnerships could still be 
at an early stage, as per the high number of ‘No impact’ in the survey responses. 
However, it can also be highlighted that the most tangible benefits noticed by 
respondents were in the areas of new product offerings (71%) and operational 
expenses (78%). Banks and NBFCs that participated in the survey indicated that 
they were able to realise improvement in their loan productivity and loan volumes 
and reduce their fraud losses. The responses from other FS players indicated 
that partnerships also helped them in managing their operational expenses. 
Additionally, partnerships have helped manage scaling challenges for payments 
and MSME loans in the case of some organisations and facilitated co-creation of 
products with SMEs and experts. 
25 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

Key drivers of partnerships 
By forming collaborative alliances, companies in the FinTech industry can accelerate their time-to-market for innovative 
solutions while ensuring regulatory compliance. This section explores the key drivers behind partnerships, emphasising 
how they can drive transformative initiatives and create synergies that reshape the industry’s landscape: 
Figure 16: Key drivers of partnerships 
01 Resource-sharing 
Market access and time-
Branding and product 
02 
03
to-market 
differentiation 
Partnerships can help start-ups 
gain access to the vast resources 
that incumbents typically have, 
while offering their tech expertise 
and talent capabilities in exchange. 
This sharing of resources can 
help create a synergy and enable 
both entities to come together to 
foster collaborative innovation that 
is better than what either of the 
parties could create on their own, 
at potentially better operational and 
cost efficiencies. 
04 Risk mitigation 
Partnerships can help companies 
push new products faster to the 
consumer as tech start-ups can 
get access to the incumbents’ 
established distribution network, 
and in certain cases, their consumer 
base too. This may help start-
ups to offer their culture of agility 
and flexibility to incumbents and 
get easier access to their larger 
customer base, allowing them to 
jointly build scalable solutions with a 
better speed-to-market. 
05 Regulations 
Partnerships can also help 
companies to leverage each 
other’s brand strengths to create 
and market a product that can be 
portrayed to have the best of both 
brands. This can help partnering 
companies to attain a competitive 
edge. By combining the financial 
expertise and consumer data of the 
established company with cutting-
edge technologies of start-ups, the 
partnership can help make products 
that appeal better to consumers. 
Partnerships can allow for risk-
sharing arrangements where both 
parties share their resources and 
expertise, reducing individual 
exposure to financial, operational 
and technological risks associated 
with developing and deploying new 
FinTech solutions. 
In some cases, licensing and 
regulations can act as entry barriers 
for a company. Such companies 
can then leverage partnerships with 
established companies within the 
industry to overcome those entry 
barriers. 
Source: PwC analysis 
26 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Primary research findings 
Figure 17. Primary reasons behind organisations’ decision to collaborate/partner 
What are the primary reasons behind your organisation's decision to collaborate/partner? 
Speed to market 
Collaborative innovation 
Ecosystem development 
Tech expertise and innovation mindset 
Difficulty to build internally 
Market expansion 
26% 
32% 
35% 
42% 
65% 
74% 
Other opinions expressed 
• 
Partnered for managing regulatory constraints 
Source: PwC survey and analysis 
When observing the most common objective that 
companies chose for collaborating and partnering, 
better speed-to-market and collaborative innovation 
were the top choices as mentioned by 75% and 65% 
of the respondents respectively. This could be driven 
by a competitive landscape, rapid tech advancements 
and organisations’ talent constraints. Some of the other 
reasons for companies to choose partnerships include 
ecosystem development, need for tech expertise and 
innovation, difficulty in building internally and market 
expansion. 
27 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Primary research findings 
Figure 18. Modes of potential partner evaluation 
How do you evaluate potential partners and ensure alignment with your strategic objectives? 
29%
42%
6%
23%
Other opinions expressed 
• 
Hybrid between the existing policy and a separate FinTech policy
• 
Area of focus of partnership
• 
Market opportunities and technical capability of partners
• 
Based on impact analysis done for specific needs
Source: PwC analysis 
Existing policy for onboarding 
vendors 
Separate FinTech policy (criteria 
based evaluation with established 
KPIs) 
NA 
Other 
28   PwC   |  Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India
Respondents stated that they have a variety of 
approaches to evaluate potential partners and ensure 
alignment with their strategic objectives. Many prioritise 
a separate FinTech policy with criteria-based evaluations 
and established KPIs, thus underscoring a structured 
approach to ensure strategic alignment. Others rely on 
existing vendor onboarding policies or a hybrid of both. 
This diversity suggests a nuanced consideration of 
market opportunities, technical capabilities and regulatory 
landscapes when forming partnerships. The mention of 
revenue/risk sharing and specific functional requirements 
further emphasises the importance of tailored partnerships 
to achieve strategic objectives effectively. Overall, the 
respondents highlight a balanced approach within the 
FinTech innovation landscape, leveraging structured 
evaluations alongside adaptive strategies to foster 
collaboration. 
28 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

Emerging partnership themes 
Table 3 illustrates a list of emerging themes that highlight the effort taken by FIs and technology companies to 
collaboratively work on solutions that are transforming the FS landscape – especially through initiatives focused on 
sustainability, data-driven insights, ecosystem integrations etc. 
29 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 
Table 3. Emerging partnership themes 
Theme 
Ecosystem 
collaboration 
Description 
Potential reasons for growth 
Integrating FS and non-FS solutions 
These partnerships can support in embedding a broader range 
into multiple ecosystem enhanced 
of FS and non-FS solutions at a single point of engagement, 
engagement 
thereby enhancing the overall user experience and streamlining 
operations. 
Collaboration for 
Partnerships for leveraging data analytics 
data and analytics 
and AI solutions for personalising FS and 
enabling better decision-making 
With the growth of data availability, advanced analytics and 
AI capabilities, these partnerships can help in empowering 
FIs in leveraging solutions that can help innovate their risk 
management practices. These solutions can also support FIs to 
improve their overall customer experience. 
ESG and 
Developing solutions on the themes of 
These partnerships are enabling FIs to develop solutions that 
sustainability 
green investments, sustainable finance 
appeal to the investors who are environmentally conscious. 
and supporting FIs to adhere to ESG 
They are also helping FIs to meet specific sustainability 
standards 
focused regulatory requirements. 
Improving financial 
Development of solutions which can 
These are partnerships that can augment the expertise of 
inclusion 
increase access of FS products to the 
technology and FS players to develop FS solutions that are 
underserved 
inclusive and can reach the underserved segments of the 
market. 
Enabling better 
Partnerships for better protection of 
These partnerships help FIs to leverage the expertise of 
security and 
customer data 
their counterparts in the domain of cybersecurity to develop 
privacy 
solutions that can help defend against cyber threats. These 
partnerships also help FIs to abide by regulations focused on 
data protection. 
RegTech and GRC 
Solutions for better governance and 
These partnerships help FIs to track the evolving regulatory 
compliance management 
climate and employ solutions that can manage and automate 
requirements for compliance to complex regulations. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Primary research findings 
Figure 19. Emerging trends relevant for partnerships 
Which of these emerging trends do you believe are most relevant for partnerships for your organisation? 
Niche customer acquisition, seamless customer onboarding and 
contextual engagement 
Risk and compliance 
Embedded finance across the FS and non-FS value chain 
Ecosystem offerings 
Payments 
Sustainable financing 
Wealth and investment solutions 
DeFi and tokenisation 
Cross-border finance 
16% 
19% 
19% 
26% 
35% 
55% 
55% 
65% 
68% 
Other opinions expressed 
• 
Payment innovations 
• 
Digital transformation 
• 
Data and analytics 
• 
Regulatory liaising 
• 
Market data collection 
Source: PwC analysis 
30   PwC   |  Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India
The survey data analysis indicates that there was a focus on improving 
customer satisfaction and retaining customers through personalised 
acquisition methods, frictionless onboarding and contextual engagement. 
Approximately 68% of the respondents mentioned that as one of the 
emerging themes for partnerships in the FS landscape. Approximately 65% 
of the respondents also identified risk and compliance as a key theme to 
focus on, thereby underscoring the industry’s commitment in navigating the 
regulatory complexities to stay compliant and bridge the trust gap among 
customers. With approximately 55% of respondents indicating an interest in 
embedded finance and ecosystem offering, it can be understood that there 
is a growing trend towards integrating FS and non-FS value-added services 
aimed at different ecosystems to offer stakeholders a composite value 
proposition at their point of consumption to enhance their engagement. 
Moreover, the focus of 26% of respondents on sustainable financing 
solutions indicates a growing trend to cater to the environmentally conscious 
individuals and an organisational shift in focus towards ESG considerations. 
These insights highlight the versatile approach that FIs are taking in terms of 
their partnerships, which are driven not just by innovation but also the need 
to stay compliant and customer-focused. 
30 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Challenges in partnerships 
When exploring partnerships in the FinTech sector, several challenges can arise. Here are some of the key challenges: 
Figure 20. Challenges in partnerships 
Regulatory 
Data security and 
Integration 
Cultural and operational 
compliance 
privacy 
issues 
differences 
FinTech partnerships 
often involve navigating 
complex and varied 
regulatory environments. 
Different partners might 
be subject to different 
regulations, which can 
lead to compliance 
challenges and increase 
the risk of regulatory 
breaches. 
Intellectual property and 
ownership 
Sharing data between 
partners raises concerns 
about data security and 
privacy. Ensuring that 
all partners adhere to 
strict security protocols 
and comply with data 
protection regulations 
is crucial but can be 
challenging. 
Alignment of goals and 
objectives 
Integrating different 
technology platforms, 
systems and processes 
can be complex and 
time-consuming. 
Compatibility issues 
might arise, potentially 
leading to inefficiencies or 
disruptions in service. 
Trust and 
transparency 
Partners may have 
different corporate 
cultures, business 
practices and operational 
methodologies. These 
differences can create 
friction and hinder 
effective collaboration. 
Market 
competition 
Determining the ownership 
of intellectual property 
developed through 
the partnership can 
be contentious. Clear 
agreements are necessary 
to avoid disputes over 
intellectual property rights 
and usage. 
Scalability and 
flexibility 
Ensuring that all partners 
have aligned goals and 
objectives is essential for 
a successful partnership. 
Misaligned objectives 
can lead to conflicts and 
inefficiencies. 
Customer 
experience 
Building and maintaining 
trust is crucial in 
partnerships. Lack of 
transparency or perceived 
dishonesty can undermine 
relationships and affect 
the partnership’s success. 
Financial risk and 
revenue sharing 
Partners in FinTech may 
also be competitors in 
certain areas. Balancing 
collaboration with 
competition can be tricky, 
and there is a risk of one 
partner gaining an unfair 
advantage. 
Governance and 
decision-making 
Partnerships need to be 
Ensuring a seamless 
Agreeing on financial 
Establishing clear 
designed with scalability 
and consistent customer 
terms, such as revenue 
governance structures 
and flexibility in mind. As 
experience across 
sharing and cost 
and decision-making 
market conditions and 
different partners can 
allocation, can be a 
processes is crucial. 
business needs evolve, 
be challenging. Any 
point of contention. 
Disagreements over how 
partners must be able to 
inconsistencies can lead 
Misunderstandings or 
decisions are made and 
adapt without causing 
to customer dissatisfaction 
disagreements over 
who has authority can 
disruptions. 
and harm the partnership’s 
financial matters can strain 
lead to inefficiencies and 
reputation. 
relationships. 
conflicts. 
Source: PwC analysis 
To proactively manage these challenges, FIs typically develop agreements and MoUs for partnerships that cover 
areas of compliance to regulatory norms and intellectual property rights, along with clauses on financial terms. These 
agreements can help FIs to set expectations from the partnership, manage the various stakeholders involved, and 
help resolve any conflicts that arise from these collaborations. It is also pertinent for FIs to set up robust governance 
structures that involve both partners to ease integration challenges between the organisations – both in terms of 
technology and organisational culture – by streamlining channels of communication. 
31 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

Primary research findings 
Figure 21. Challenges faced by organisations during partnerships 
Challenges faced by organisations during partnerships 
61% 
48%
45% 
35% 
23%
26% 
32% 
42% 
39% 
23% 
19% 
16% 
42% 
45% 
45%
39% 
39% 
39% 
35% 
29%
26% 
23% 
16%
13% 
Core system 
Ancillary system 
API maturity 
Speed to 
Vetting potential 
Back office 
Finding potential 
Partner 
integration 
integration 
market 
vendors 
constraints 
partners 
onboarding and 
governance 
No challenge 
Moderate challenge 
Significant challenge 
Source: PwC analysis 
About 45% and 39% of survey respondents indicated that integration of core and ancillary systems respectively was 
a significant challenge to partnerships with other organisations. Further analysis of the data also revealed speed-
to-market to be a moderate challenge for more than 50% of the respondents. For 48% of the respondents, the API 
maturity of potential partners also posed a moderate challenge. In general, many respondents also expressed that 
they faced moderate to significant challenges in identifying, vetting and onboarding potential partner(s). Some of 
the other challenges that respondents faced while traversing their partnership journey included financial stability, 
business models, funding and accountability of their partners and regulatory uncertainty of their partnerships. 
32 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 22. Ways to mitigate partnership challenges 
Ways to mitigate partnership challenges and ensure the smooth execution of partnership initiatives 
A value realisation framework to assess the impact of 
innovation and partnerships for the organisation 
Dedicated team/office to manage innovation 
and partnerships 
Updated FinTech/start-up focused policy 
19% 
45% 
52% 
Other opinions expressed 
• 
Clearly delineated roles for each category of partnership 
• 
Fostering a culture of technology appreciation in FIs 
• 
FIs recognising and understanding challenges faced by FinTech entities 
• 
Development and maintenance of a comprehensive developer portal, including a catalogue of all APIs, and the 
standardisation of these APIs 
• 
Capability to navigate and adapt to regulatory uncertainties 
Primary research findings 
Source: PwC analysis 
Organisations were taking up multiple approaches to manage the challenges they faced as a result of 
their partnerships. Over 50% of the respondents considered setting up a structure value realisation 
framework for assessing the impact of innovation and partnership for organisations to manage and 
mitigate their challenges. It was also noted that approximately 45% of the respondents considered 
that setting up a dedicated internal team for managing their innovations and partnerships could 
be beneficial. Around 19% of the respondents focused on the need to either develop or update 
their existing FinTech or start-up policies to better manage their partnerships. A few respondents 
also mentioned that working towards the development of specialised portals for managing and 
standardising APIs could help in the overall collaboration between partners. 
33 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

 
Way forward 
The inputs received from the industry through our primary research survey highlight a spectrum of perspectives on the 
future of FinTech, ranging from cautious optimism to strategic foresight. Many respondents were optimistic about the 
sector’s growth trajectory, anticipating a substantial increase in the adoption of FinTech solutions – particularly in payment 
systems, risk management, and expansion into new sectors. There is also a strong emphasis on collaborative efforts 
within the FinTech ecosystem, with expectations that partnerships can increase significantly from current levels to facilitate 
innovation and market expansion. 
However, along with these optimistic projections, concerns 
about challenges such as digital security risks and the 
imperative of regulatory compliance were also evident. 
There is an emphasis on the need for FinTech companies 
to navigate the continuously evolving regulatory landscape 
and forge compliant partnerships to sustain growth. 
Additionally, there seems to be a prominent expectation 
among stakeholders that the industry’s evolution will likely 
lead to more mature and sustainable growth patterns, 
focusing on profitability and long-term viability rather than 
rapid but unstable expansion. 
Hence, enabling the right approach to innovation, especially 
collaborative innovation, is important for any company. 
A few key imperatives that organisations can look at for 
successfully fostering innovation have therefore been listed 
as follows: 
1. Leveraging digital infrastructure 
Organisations can aim to harness the country’s digital 
public infrastructure, as well as their own organisational 
infrastructure, including APIs and testing environments 
like sandboxes, to streamline and accelerate the creation 
of innovative products, features and distribution channels. 
These tools help to facilitate seamless integration with 
partners and enable iterative testing of new ideas, thus 
driving innovation and market responsiveness. 
2. Cultivating a culture driven by innovation 
Organisations can instil a culture that fosters innovation 
at all levels, by engaging actively with their employees, by 
supporting their ideas and incentivising their contributions 
to the company’s innovation initiatives. Organisations 
can also inculcate an innovation mindset by regularly 
conducting brainstorming sessions and workshops. 
3. Determining the mode of innovation – build, procure 
or partner 
Organisations can assess and choose the most effective 
method for pursuing innovation based on factors 
such as time-to-market, span of control, scalability of 
operation, revenue generation and cost optimisation, and 
talent requirement. This strategic evaluation can help 
organisations to align their initiatives with business goals 
and optimise resources. 
4. Managing innovation and compliance 
Organisations can create specialised teams, such as an 
Innovation Management Office to drive and coordinate 
innovation projects and a Compliance Management Office 
to oversee regulatory requirements. Such teams can 
help align the organisations’ innovative efforts with legal 
and industry standards, while mitigating risks related to 
compliance. 
5. Developing clear FinTech/partnership policies 
Organisations must implement a comprehensive FinTech 
and partnership policy which outlines roles, responsibilities 
and evaluation criteria for potential collaborations, along 
with a well-defined process for onboarding partners and 
measuring performance through established KPIs to forge 
effective and accountable partnerships. 
6. Implementing a value realisation framework 
Organisation can utilise a value realisation framework 
to systematically assess the outcomes and benefits of 
innovation initiatives and partnerships. This framework 
can help organisations to measure key metrics such as 
financial returns, market impact and strategic alignment to 
determine the overall success and value generated from 
these activities. 
PwC, through its three-pronged approach of ‘explore’, 
‘experiment’ and ‘embed’ and its deep entrenchment in the 
FinTech ecosystem has supported multiple incumbent FIs 
to institutionalise their partnerships and enhance the impact 
created through them. Basis our experience, we are seeing 
considerable evolution of the bank-FinTech partnerships, 
with more players collaborating for co-creation across 
areas such as AI, LLM-enabled FS products and ecosystem 
banking. 
Overall, the consensus points to a dynamic future for Indian 
FinTech, driven by technological advancements, strategic 
collaborations and a proactive regulatory environment 
aimed at fostering innovation while ensuring consumer 
protection and financial stability. 
34 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

35   PwC   |  Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India
Appendix 
Methodology 
firms and FinTechs. In total, 31 FIs participated in the 
primary research exercise, ensuring a broad representation 
of the FS landscape. 
The section below provides a brief context on the 
methodology followed for conducting the primary research 
3. Data collection and analysis 
for deriving insights on the innovation and partnership 
landscape in the Indian FinTech ecosystem. 
The following methods were used for collecting data from 
the respondents. 
1. Questionnaire design 
a.  Survey: The questionnaire was shared online to senior 
For the primary research, a questionnaire was designed with 
executives of the FIs to gather data on current innovation 
the objective of collecting both qualitative and quantitative 
and partnership trends, their impact and challenges. 
information on two fronts: 
b.  Virtual and in-person interviews: In-depth interviews 
• 
innovation initiatives taken up by organisations, drivers 
were conducted based on the created questionnaire with 
behind the initiatives, impacts realised, and challenges 
a few FIs. 
faced while institutionalising the same 
Both qualitative and quantitative information collected were 
• 
importance of partnerships and collaborations as part 
analysed to identify significant trends in terms of FinTech 
of the innovation journey of organisations, factors 
innovation and partnership landscape. The gathered 
driving partnerships, emerging partnership trends, 
insights were then used to arrive at key imperatives for FIs 
impacts realised, and challenges faced by organisations 
to harness the potential of innovation. 
when institutionalising partnerships. 
Moreover, in order to extract and analyse insights while 
The questionnaire had 21 questions in total, distributed 
maintaining the confidentiality and privacy of the survey 
between both fronts. 
respondents, the survey data was aggregated and 
2. Target participants 
anonymised, so that the insights drawn are on an aggregate 
of the sample and not based on individual data points. 
The primary research conducted as a part of drafting this 
report involved a range of FIs including banks, insurance 
35 PwC  | Mapping the FinTech innovation landscape in India 

About PwC 
At PwC, our purpose is to build trust in society and solve 
important problems. We’re a network of firms in 151 countries with 
over 360,000 people who ar
 
 
e committed to delivering quality in assurance, 
advisory and tax services. Find out more and tell us what matters to you by 
visiting us at www.pwc.com. 
PwC refers to the PwC network and/or one or more of its member firms, 
each of which is a separate legal entity. Please see www.pwc.com/ 
structure for further details. 
 
© 2024 PwC. All rights r
 
 
eserved. 
Contact us 
Vivek Belgavi 
Partner and Leader – Alliances and Ecosystems 
vivek.belgavi@pwc.com 
Mihir Gandhi 
Partner and Leader – FinTech and Payments 
Transformation 
mihir.gandhi@pwc.com 
Raghav Aggarwal 
Associate Director – FinTech and Innovation 
Strategy 
raghav.aggarwal@pwc.com 
Contributors 
Arham Jain 
Vignesh Venkataraman 
Raghav Aggarwal 
Editor 
Design 
Rashi Gupta 
Shipra Gupta 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pwc.in 
Data Classification: DC0 (Public) 
In this document, PwC refers to PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited (a limited liability company in India having Corporate Identity Number or 
CIN : U74140WB1983PTC036093), which is a member firm of PricewaterhouseCoopers International Limited (PwCIL), each member firm of which is a 
separate legal entity. 
This document does not constitute professional advice. The information in this document has been obtained or derived from sources believed 
by PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited (PwCPL) to be reliable but PwCPL does not represent that this information is accurate or complete. 
Any opinions or estimates contained in this document represent the judgment of PwCPL at this time and are subject to change without notice. 
Readers of this publication are advised to seek their own professional advice before taking any course of action or decision, for which they are 
entirely responsible, based on the contents of this publication. PwCPL neither accepts or assumes any responsibility or liability to any reader of this 
publication in respect of the information contained within it or for any decisions readers may take or decide not to or fail to take. 
© 2024 PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited. All rights reserved. 
SG/August 2024-M&C 40153 
